PREFACE
Hitherto men have constantly made up for themselves false conceptions about themselves, about what
they are and what they ought to be. They have arranged their relationships according to their ideas of
God, of normal man, etc. The phantoms of their brains have got out of their hands. They, the creators,
have bowed down before their creations. Let us liberate them from the chimeras, the ideas, dogmas,
imaginary beings under the yoke of which they are pining away. Let us revolt against the rule of
thoughts. Let us teach men, says one, to exchange these imaginations for thoughts which correspond to
the essence of man; says the second, to take up a critical attitude to them; says the third, to knock them
out of their heads; and -- existing reality will collapse.
These innocent and childlike fancies are the kernel of the modern Young-Hegelian philosophy, which not
only is received by the German public with horror and awe, but is announced by our philosophic heroes
with the solemn consciousness of its cataclysmic dangerousness and criminal ruthlessness. The first
volume of the present publication has the aim of uncloaking these sheep, who take themselves and are
taken for wolves; of showing how their bleating merely imitates in a philosophic form the conceptions of
the German middle class; how the boasting of these philosophic commentators only mirrors the
wretchedness of the real conditions in Germany. It is its aim to debunk and discredit the philosophic
struggle with the shadows of reality, which appeals to the dreamy and muddled German nation.
Once upon a time a valiant fellow had the idea that men were drowned in water only because they were
possessed with the idea of gravity. If they were to knock this notion out of their heads, say by stating it to
be a superstition, a religious concept, they would be sublimely proof against any danger from water. His
whole life long he fought against the illusion of gravity, of whose harmful results all statistic brought him
new and manifold evidence. This valiant fellow was the type of the new revolutionary philosophers in
Germany.
Next Section
Table of Contents for The German Ideology
Marxist Writers Archive
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/preface.htm [23/08/2000 16:33:48]
Karl Marx
THE GERMAN IDEOLOGY
Part I
FEUERBACH.
OPPOSTION OF THE MATERIALIST
AND IDEALIST OUTLOOK
A. IDEALISM AND MATERIALISM
The Illusions of German Ideology
As we hear from German ideologists, Germany has in the last few years gone through an unparalleled
revolution. The decomposition of the Hegelian philosophy, which began with Strauss, has developed into
a universal ferment into which all the "powers of the past" are swept. In the general chaos mighty
empires have arisen only to meet with immediate doom, heroes have emerged momentarily only to be
hurled back into obscurity by bolder and stronger rivals. It was a revolution beside which the French
Revolution was child's play, a world struggle beside which the struggles of the Diadochi [successors of
Alexander the Great] appear insignificant. Principles ousted one another, heroes of the mind overthrew
each other with unheard-of rapidity, and in the three years 1842-45 more of the past was swept away in
Germany than at other times in three centuries.
All this is supposed to have taken place in the realm of pure thought.
Certainly it is an interesting event we are dealing with: the putrescence of the absolute spirit. When the
last spark of its life had failed, the various components of this caput mortuum began to decompose,
entered into new combinations and formed new substances. The industrialists of philosophy, who till
then had lived on the exploitation of the absolute spirit, now seized upon the new combinations. Each
with all possible zeal set about retailing his apportioned share. This naturally gave rise to competition,
which, to start with, was carried on in moderately staid bourgeois fashion. Later when the German
market was glutted, and the commodity in spite of all efforts found no response in the world market, the
business was spoiled in the usual German manner by fabricated and fictitious production, deterioration in
quality, adulteration of the raw materials, falsification of labels, fictitious purchases, bill-jobbing and a
credit system devoid of any real basis. The competition turned into a bitter struggle, which is now being
extolled and interpreted to us as a revolution of world significance, the begetter of the most prodigious
results and achievements.
If we wish to rate at its true value this philosophic charlatanry, which awakens even in the breast of the
honest German citizen a glow of national pride, if we wish to bring out clearly the pettiness, the parochial
narrowness of this whole Young-Hegelian movement and in particular the tragicomic contrast between
the illusions of these heroes about their achievements and the actual achievements themselves, we must
look at the whole spectacle from a standpoint beyond the frontiers of Germany.
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (1 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]
German criticism has, right up to its latest efforts, never quitted the realm of philosophy. Far from
examining its general philosophic premises, the whole body of its inquiries has actually sprung from the
soil of a definite philosophical system, that of Hegel. Not only in their answers but in their very questions
there was a mystification. This dependence on Hegel is the reason why not one of these modern critics
has even attempted a comprehensive criticism of the Hegelian system, however much each professes to
have advanced beyond Hegel. Their polemics against Hegel and against one another are confined to this
-- each extracts one side of the Hegelian system and turns this against the whole system as well as against
the sides extracted by the others. To begin with they extracted pure unfalsified Hegelian categories such
as "substance" and "self-consciousness", later they desecrated these categories with more secular names
such as species "the Unique", "Man", etc.
The entire body of German philosophical criticism from Strauss to Stirner is confined to criticism of
religious conceptions. The critics started from real religion and actual theology. What religious
consciousness and a religious conception really meant was determined variously as they went along.
Their advance consisted in subsuming the allegedly dominant metaphysical, political, juridical, moral
and other conceptions under the class of religious or theological conceptions; and similarly in
pronouncing political, juridical, moral consciousness as religious or theological, and the political,
juridical, moral man -- "man" in the last resort -- as religious. The dominance of religion was taken for
granted. Gradually every dominant relationship was pronounced a religious relationship and transformed
into a cult, a cult of law, a cult of the State, etc. On all sides it was only a question of dogmas and belief
in dogmas. The world was sanctified to an ever-increasing extent till at last our venerable Saint Max was
able to canonise it en bloc and thus dispose of it once for all.
The Old Hegelians had comprehended everything as soon as it was reduced to an Hegelian logical
category. The Young Hegelians criticised everything by attributing to it religious conceptions or by
pronouncing it a theological matter. The Young Hegelians are in agreement with the Old Hegelians in
their belief in the rule of religion, of concepts, of a universal principle in the existing world. Only, the
one party attacks this dominion as usurpation. while the other extols it as legitimate.
Since the Young Hegelians consider conceptions, thoughts, ideas, in fact all the products of
consciousness, to which they attribute an independent existence, as the real chains of men (just as the Old
Hegelians declared them the true bonds of human society) it is evident that the Young Hegelians have to
fight only against these illusions of consciousness. Since, according to their fantasy, the relationships of
men, all their doings, their chains and their limitations are products of their consciousness, the Young
Hegelians logically put to men the moral postulate of exchanging their present consciousness for human,
critical or egoistic consciousness, and thus of removing their limitations. This demand to change
consciousness amounts to a demand to interpret reality in another way, i.e. to recognise it by means of
another interpretation. The Young-Hegelian ideologists, in spite of their allegedly "world-shattering"
statements, are the staunchest conservatives. The most recent of them have found the correct expression
for their activity when they declare they are only fighting against "phrases". They forget, however, that to
these phrases they themselves are only opposing other phrases, and that they are in no way combating the
real existing world when they are merely combating the phrases of this world. The only results which this
philosophic criticism could achieve were a few (and at that thoroughly one-sided) elucidations of
Christianity from the point of view of religious history; all the rest of their assertions are only further
embellishments of their claim to have furnished, in these unimportant elucidations, discoveries of
universal importance.
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (2 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]
It has not occurred to any one of these philosophers to inquire into the connection of German philosophy
with German reality, the relation of their criticism to their own material surroundings.
First Premises of Materialist Method
The premises from which we begin are not arbitrary ones, not dogmas, but real premises from which
abstraction can only be made in the imagination. They are the real individuals, their activity and the
material conditions under which they live, both those which they find already existing and those
produced by their activity. These premises can thus be verified in a purely empirical way.
The first premise of all human history is, of course, the existence of living human individuals. Thus the
first fact to be established is the physical organisation of these individuals and their consequent relation
to the rest of nature. Of course, we cannot here go either into the actual physical nature of man, or into
the natural conditions in which man finds himself -- geological, hydrographical, climatic and so on. The
writing of history must always set out from these natural bases and their modification in the course of
history through the action of men.
Men can be distinguished from animals by consciousness, by religion or anything else you like. They
themselves begin to distinguish themselves from animals as soon as they begin to produce their means of
subsistence, a step which is conditioned by their physical organisation. By producing their means of
subsistence men are indirectly producing their actual material life.
The way in which men produce their means of subsistence depends first of all on the nature of the actual
means of subsistence they find in existence and have to reproduce. This mode of production must not be
considered simply as being the production of the physical existence of the individuals. Rather it is a
definite form of activity of these individuals, a definite form of expressing their life, a definite mode of
life on their part. As individuals express their life, so they are. What they are, therefore, coincides with
their production, both with what they produce and with how they produce. The nature of individuals thus
depends on the material conditions determining their production.
This production only makes its appearance with the increase of population. In its turn this presupposes
the intercourse [Verkehr]1 of individuals with one another. The form of this intercourse is again
determined by production.
The relations of different nations among themselves depend upon the extent to which each has developed
its productive forces, the division of labour and internal intercourse. This statement is generally
recognised. But not only the relation of one nation to others, but also the whole internal structure of the
nation itself depends on the stage of development reached by its production and its internal and external
intercourse. How far the productive forces of a nation are developed is shown most manifestly by the
degree to which the division of labour has been carried. Each new productive force, insofar as it is not
merely a quantitative extension of productive forces already known (for instance the bringing into
cultivation of fresh land), causes a further development of the division of labour.
The division of labour inside a nation leads at first to the separation of industrial and commercial from
agricultural labour, and hence to the separation of town and country and to the conflict of their interests.
Its further development leads to the separation of commercial from industrial labour. At the same time
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (3 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]
through the division of labour inside these various branches there develop various divisions among the
individuals co-operating in definite kinds of labour. The relative position of these individual groups is
determined by the methods employed in agriculture, industry and commerce (patriarchalism, slavery,
estates, classes). These same conditions are to be seen (given a more developed intercourse) in the
relations of different nations to one another.
The various stages of development in the division of labour are just so many different forms of
ownership, i.e. the existing stage in the division of labour determines also the relations of individuals to
one another with reference to the material, instrument, and product of labour.
The first form of ownership is tribal [Stammeigentum]1 ownership. It corresponds to the undeveloped
stage of production, at which a people lives by hunting and fishing, by the rearing of beasts or, in the
highest stage, agriculture. In the latter case it presupposes a great mass of uncultivated stretches of land.
The division of labour is at this stage still very elementary and is confined to a further extension of the
natural division of labour existing in the family. The social structure is, therefore, limited to an extension
of the family; patriarchal family chieftains, below them the members of the tribe, finally slaves. The
slavery latent in the family only develops gradually with the increase of population, the growth of wants,
and with the extension of external relations, both of war and of barter.
The second form is the ancient communal and State ownership which proceeds especially from the union
of several tribes into a city by agreement or by conquest, and which is still accompanied by slavery.
Beside communal ownership we already find movable, and later also immovable, private property
developing, but as an abnormal form subordinate to communal ownership. The citizens hold power over
their labouring slaves only in their community, and on this account alone, therefore, they are bound to the
form of communal ownership. It is the communal private property which compels the active citizens to
remain in this spontaneously derived form of association over against their slaves. For this reason the
whole structure of society based on this communal ownership, and with it the power of the people,
decays in the same measure as, in particular, immovable private property evolves. The division of labour
is already more developed. We already find the antagonism of town and country; later the antagonism
between those states which represent town interests and those which represent country interests, and
inside the towns themselves the antagonism between industry and maritime commerce. The class relation
between citizens and slaves is now completely developed.
With the development of private property, we find here for the first time the same conditions which we
shall find again, only on a more extensive scale, with modern private property. On the one hand, the
concentration of private property, which began very early in Rome (as the Licinian agrarian law proves 1
) and proceeded very rapidly from the time of the civil wars and especially under the Emperors; on the
other hand, coupled with this, the transformation of the plebeian small peasantry into a proletariat, which,
however, owing to its intermediate position between propertied citizens and slaves, never achieved an
independent development.
The third form of ownership is feudal or estate property. If antiquity started out from the town and its
little territory, the Middle Ages started out from the country. This different starting-point was determined
by the sparseness of the population at that time, which was scattered over a large area and which received
no large increase from the conquerors. In contrast to Greece and Rome, feudal development at the outset,
therefore, extends over a much wider territory, prepared by the Roman conquests and the spread of
agriculture at first associated with it. The last centuries of the declining Roman Empire and its conquest
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (4 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]
by the barbarians destroyed a number of productive forces; agriculture had declined, industry had
decayed for want of a market, trade had died out or been violently suspended, the rural and urban
population had decreased. From these conditions and the mode of organisation of the conquest
determined by them, feudal property developed under the influence of the Germanic military
constitution. Like tribal and communal ownership, it is based again on a community; but the directly
producing class standing over against it is not, as in the case of the ancient community, the slaves, but the
enserfed small peasantry. As soon as feudalism is fully developed, there also arises antagonism to the
towns. The hierarchical structure of land ownership, and the armed bodies of retainers associated with it,
gave the nobility power over the serfs. This feudal organisation was, just as much as the ancient
communal ownership, an association against a subjected producing class; but the form of association and
the relation to the direct producers were different because of the different conditions of production.
This feudal system of land ownership had its counterpart in the towns in the shape of corporative
property, the feudal organisation of trades. Here property consisted chiefly in the labour of each
individual person. The necessity for association against the organised robber-nobility, the need for
communal covered markets in an age when the industrialist was at the same time a merchant, the
growing competition of the escaped serfs swarming into the rising towns, the feudal structure of the
whole country: these combined to bring about the guilds. The gradually accumulated small capital of
individual craftsmen and their stable numbers, as against the growing population, evolved the relation of
journeyman and apprentice, which brought into being in the towns a hierarchy similar to that in the
country.
Thus the chief form of property during the feudal epoch consisted on the one hand of landed property
with serf labour chained to it, and on the other of the labour of the individual with small capital
commanding the labour of journeymen. The organisation of both was determined by the restricted
conditions of production -- the small-scale and primitive cultivation of the land, and the craft type of
industry. There was little division of labour in the heyday of feudalism. Each country bore in itself the
antithesis of town and country; the division into estates was certainly strongly marked; but apart from the
differentiation of princes, nobility, clergy and peasants in the country, and masters, journeymen,
apprentices and soon also the rabble of casual labourers in the towns, no division of importance took
place. In agriculture it was rendered difficult by the strip-system, beside which the cottage industry of the
peasants themselves emerged. In industry there was no division of labour at all in the individual trades
themselves, and very little between them. The separation of industry and commerce was found already in
existence in older towns; in the newer it only developed later, when the towns entered into mutual
relations.
The grouping of larger territories into feudal kingdoms was a necessity for the landed nobility as for the
towns. The organisation of the ruling class, the nobility, had, therefore, everywhere a monarch at its
head.
The fact is, therefore, that definite individuals who are productively active in a definite way enter into
these definite social and political relations. Empirical observation must in each separate instance bring
out empirically, and without any mystification and speculation, the connection of the social and political
structure with production. The social structure and the State are continually evolving out of the
life-process of definite individuals, but of individuals, not as they may appear in their own or other
people's imagination, but as they really are; i.e. as they operate, produce materially, and hence as they
work under definite material limits, presuppositions and conditions independent of their will.
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (5 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]
The production of ideas, of conceptions, of consciousness, is at first directly interwoven with the material
activity and the material intercourse of men, the language of real life. Conceiving, thinking, the mental
intercourse of men, appear at this stage as the direct efflux of their material behaviour. The same applies
to mental production as expressed in the language of politics, laws, morality, religion, metaphysics, etc.
of a people. Men are the producers of their conceptions, ideas, etc. -- real, active men, as they are
conditioned by a definite development of their productive forces and of the intercourse corresponding to
these, up to its furthest forms. Consciousness can never be anything else than conscious existence, and
the existence of men is their actual life-process. If in all ideology men and their circumstances appear
upside-down as in a camera obscura, this phenomenon arises just as much from their historical
life-process as the inversion of objects on the retina does from their physical life-process.
In direct contrast to German philosophy which descends from heaven to earth, here we ascend from earth
to heaven. That is to say, we do not set out from what men say, imagine, conceive, nor from men as
narrated, thought of, imagined, conceived, in order to arrive at men in the flesh. We set out from real,
active men, and on the basis of their real life-process we demonstrate the development of the ideological
reflexes and echoes of this life-process. The phantoms formed in the human brain are also, necessarily,
sublimates of their material life-process, which is empirically verifiable and bound to material premises.
Morality, religion, metaphysics, all the rest of ideology and their corresponding forms of consciousness,
thus no longer retain the semblance of independence. They have no history, no development; but men,
developing their material production and their material intercourse, alter, along with this their real
existence, their thinking and the products of their thinking. Life is not determined by consciousness, but
consciousness by life. In the first method of approach the starting-point is consciousness taken as the
living individual; in the second method, which conforms to real life, it is the real living individuals
themselves, and consciousness is considered solely as their consciousness.
This method of approach is not devoid of premises. It starts out from the real premises and does not
abandon them for a moment. Its premises are men, not in any fantastic isolation and rigidity, but in their
actual, empirically perceptible process of development under definite conditions. As soon as this active
life-process is described, history ceases to be a collection of dead facts as it is with the empiricists
(themselves still abstract), or an imagined activity of imagined subjects, as with the idealists.
Where speculation ends -- in real life -- there real, positive science begins: the representation of the
practical activity, of the practical process of development of men. Empty talk about consciousness
ceases, and real knowledge has to take its place. When reality is depicted, philosophy as an independent
branch of knowledge loses its medium of existence. At the best its place can only be taken by a
summing-up of the most general results, abstractions which arise from the observation of the historical
development of men. Viewed apart from real history, these abstractions have in themselves no value
whatsoever. They can only serve to facilitate the arrangement of historical material, to indicate the
sequence of its separate strata. But they by no means afford a recipe or schema, as does philosophy, for
neatly trimming the epochs of history. On the contrary, our difficulties begin only when we set about the
observation and the arrangement -- the real depiction -- of our historical material, whether of a past epoch
or of the present. The removal of these difficulties is governed by premises which it is quite impossible
to state here, but which only the study of the actual life-process and the activity of the individuals of each
epoch will make evident. We shall select here some of these abstractions, which we use in
contradistinction to the ideologists, and shall illustrate them by historical examples.
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (6 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]
History: Fundamental Conditions
Since we are dealing with the Germans, who are devoid of premises, we must begin by stating the first
premise of all human existence and, therefore, of all history, the premise, namely, that men must be in a
position to live in order to be able to "make history". But life involves before everything else eating and
drinking, a habitation, clothing and many other things. The first historical act is thus the production of the
means to satisfy these needs, the production of material life itself. And indeed this is an historical act, a
fundamental condition of all history, which today, as thousands of years ago, must daily and hourly be
fulfilled merely in order to sustain human life. Even when the sensuous world is reduced to a minimum,
to a stick as with Saint Bruno [Bauer], it presupposes the action of producing the stick. Therefore in any
interpretation of history one has first of all to observe this fundamental fact in all its significance and all
its implications and to accord it its due importance. It is well known that the Germans have never done
this, and they have never, therefore, had an earthly basis for history and consequently never an historian.
The French and the English, even if they have conceived the relation of this fact with so-called history
only in an extremely one-sided fashion, particularly as long as they remained in the toils of political
ideology, have nevertheless made the first attempts to give the writing of history a materialistic basis by
being the first to write histories of civil society, of commerce and industry.
The second point is that the satisfaction of the first need (the action of satisfying, and the instrument of
satisfaction which has been acquired) leads to new needs; and this production of new needs is the first
historical act. Here we recognise immediately the spiritual ancestry of the great historical wisdom of the
Germans who, when they run out of positive material and when they can serve up neither theological nor
political nor literary rubbish, assert that this is not history at all, but the "prehistoric era". They do not,
however, enlighten us as to how we proceed from this nonsensical "prehistory" to history proper;
although, on the other hand, in their historical speculation they seize upon this "prehistory" with especial
eagerness because they imagine themselves safe there from interference on the part of "crude facts", and,
at the same time, because there they can give full rein to their speculative impulse and set up and knock
down hypotheses by the thousand.
The third circumstance which, from the very outset, enters into historical development, is that men, who
daily remake their own life, begin to make other men, to propagate their kind: the relation between man
and woman, parents and children, the family. The family, which to begin with is the only social
relationship, becomes later, when increased needs create new social relations and the increased
population new needs, a subordinate one (except in Germany), and must then be treated and analysed
according to the existing empirical data, not according to "the concept of the family", as is the custom in
Germany. [1] These three aspects of social activity are not of course to be taken as three different stages,
but just as three aspects or, to make it clear to the Germans, three "moments", which have existed
simultaneously since the dawn of history and the first men, and which still assert themselves in history
today.
The production of life, both of one's own in labour and of fresh life in procreation, now appears as a
double relationship: on the one hand as a natural, on the other as a social relationship. By social we
understand the co-operation of several individuals, no matter under what conditions, in what manner and
to what end. It follows from this that a certain mode of production, or industrial stage, is always
combined with a certain mode of co-operation, or social stage, and this mode of co-operation is itself a
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (7 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]
"productive force". Further, that the multitude of productive forces accessible to men determines the
nature of society, hence, that the "history of humanity" must always be studied and treated in relation to
the history of industry and exchange. But it is also clear how in Germany it is impossible to write this
sort of history, because the Germans lack not only the necessary power of comprehension and the
material but also the "evidence of their senses", for across the Rhine you cannot have any experience of
these things since history has stopped happening. Thus it is quite obvious from the start that there exists a
materialistic connection of men with one another, which is determined by their needs and their mode of
production, and which is as old as men themselves. This connection is ever taking on new forms, and
thus presents a "history" independently of the existence of any political or religious nonsense which in
addition may hold men together.
Only now, after having considered four moments, four aspects of the primary historical relationships, do
we find that man also possesses "consciousness", but, even so, not inherent, not "pure" consciousness.
From the start the "spirit" is afflicted with the curse of being "burdened" with matter, which here makes
its appearance in the form of agitated layers of air, sounds, in short, of language. Language is as old as
consciousness, language is practical consciousness that exists also for other men, and for that reason
alone it really exists for me personally as well; language, like consciousness, only arises from the need,
the necessity, of intercourse with other men. Where there exists a relationship, it exists for me: the animal
does not enter into "relations" with anything, it does not enter into any relation at all. For the animal, its
relation to others does not exist as a relation. Consciousness is, therefore, from the very beginning a
social product, and remains so as long as men exist at all. Consciousness is at first, of course, merely
consciousness concerning the immediate sensuous environment and consciousness of the limited
connection with other persons and things outside the individual who is growing self-conscious. At the
same time it is consciousness of nature, which first appears to men as a completely alien, all-powerful
and unassailable force, with which men's relations are purely animal and by which they are overawed
like beasts; it is thus a purely animal consciousness of nature (natural religion) just because nature is as
yet hardly modified historically. (We see here immediately: this natural religion or this particular relation
of men to nature is determined by the form of society and vice versa. Here, as everywhere, the identity of
nature and man appears in such a way that the restricted relation of men to nature determines their
restricted relation to one another, and their restricted relation to one another determines men's restricted
relation to nature.) On the other hand, man's consciousness of the necessity of associating with the
individuals around him is the beginning of the consciousness that he is living in society at all. This
beginning is as animal as social life itself at this stage. It is mere herd- consciousness, and at this point
man is only distinguished from sheep by the fact that with him consciousness takes the place of instinct
or that his instinct is a conscious one. This sheep-like or tribal consciousness receives its further
development and extension through increased productivity, the increase of needs, and, what is
fundamental to both of these, the increase of population. With these there develops the division of labour,
which was originally nothing but the division of labour in the sexual act, then that division of labour
which develops spontaneously or "naturally" by virtue of natural predisposition (e.g. physical strength),
needs, accidents, etc. etc. Division of labour only becomes truly such from the moment when a division
of material and mental labour appears. (The first form of ideologists, priests, is concurrent.) From this
moment onwards consciousness can really flatter itself that it is something other than consciousness 'of
existing practice, that it really represents something without representing something real; from now on
consciousness is in a position to emancipate itself from the world and to proceed to the formation of
"pure" theory, theology, philosophy, ethics, etc. But even if this theory, theology, philosophy, ethics, etc.
comes into contradiction with the existing relations, this can only occur because existing social relations
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (8 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]
have come into contradiction with existing forces of production; this, moreover, can also occur in a
particular national sphere of relations through the appearance of the contradiction, not within the national
orbit, but between this national consciousness and the practice of other nations, i.e. between the national
and the general consciousness of a nation (as we see it now in Germany).
Moreover, it is quite immaterial what consciousness starts to do on its own: out of all such muck we get
only the one inference that these three moments, the forces of production, the state of society, and
consciousness, can and must come into contradiction with one another, because the division of labour
implies the possibility, nay the fact that intellectual and material activity -- enjoyment and labour,
production and consumption -- devolve on different individuals, and that the only possibility of their not
coming into contradiction lies in the negation in its turn of the division of labour. It is self-evident,
moreover, that "spectres", "bonds", "the higher being", "concept", "scruple", are merely the idealistic,
spiritual expression, the conception apparently of the isolated individual, the image of very empirical
fetters and limitations, within which the mode of production of life and the form of intercourse coupled
with it move.
Private Property and Communism
With the division of labour, in which all these contradictions are implicit, and which in its turn is based
on the natural division of labour in the family and the separation of society into individual families
opposed to one another, is given simultaneously the distribution, and indeed the unequal distribution,
both quantitative and qualitative, of labour and its products, hence property: the nucleus, the first form, of
which lies in the family, where wife and children are the slaves of the husband. This latent slavery in the
family, though still very crude, is the first property, but even at this early stage it corresponds perfectly to
the definition of modern economists who call it the power of disposing of the labour-power of others.
Division of labour and private property are, moreover, identical expressions: in the one the same thing is
affirmed with reference to activity as is affirmed in the other with reference to the product of the activity.
Further, the division of labour implies the contradiction between the interest of the separate individual or
the individual family and the communal interest of all individuals who have intercourse with one another.
And indeed, this communal interest does not exist merely in the imagination, as the "general interest",
but first of all in reality, as the mutual interdependence of the individuals among whom the labour is
divided. And finally, the division of labour offers us the first example of how, as long as man remains in
natural society, that is, as long as a cleavage exists between the particular and the common interest, as
long, therefore, as activity is not voluntarily, but naturally, divided, man's own deed becomes an alien
power opposed to him, which enslaves him instead of being controlled by him. For as soon as the
distribution of labour comes into being, each man has a particular, exclusive sphere of activity, which is
forced upon him and from which he cannot escape. He is a hunter, a fisherman, a herdsman, or a critical
critic, and must remain so if he does not want to lose his means of livelihood; while in communist
society, where nobody has one exclusive sphere of activity but each can become accomplished in any
branch he wishes, society regulates the general production and thus makes it possible for me to do one
thing today and another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, fish in the afternoon, rear cattle in the
evening, criticise after dinner, just as I have a mind, without ever becoming hunter, fisherman, herdsman
or critic. This fixation of social activity, this consolidation of what we ourselves produce into an
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (9 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]
objective power above us, growing out of our control, thwarting our expectations, bringing to naught our
calculations, is one of the chief factors in historical development up till now. [2]
The social power, i.e., the multiplied productive force, which arises through the co-operation of different
individuals as it is determined by the division of labour, appears to these individuals, since their
co-operation is not voluntary but has come about naturally, not as their own united power, but as an alien
force existing outside them, of the origin and goal of which they are ignorant, which they thus cannot
control, which on the contrary passes through a peculiar series of phases and stages independent of the
will and the action of man, nay even being the prime governor of these.
How otherwise could for instance property have had a history at all, have taken on different forms, and
landed property, for example, according to the different premises given, have proceeded in France from
parcellation to centralisation in the hands of a few, in England from centralisation in the hands of a few
to parcellation, as is actually the case today? Or how does it happen that trade, which after all is nothing
more than the exchange of products of various individuals and countries, rules the whole world through
the relation of supply and demand -- a relation which, as an English economist says, hovers over the
earth like the fate of the ancients, and with invisible hand allots fortune and misfortune to men, sets up
empires and overthrows empires, causes nations to rise and to disappear -- while with the abolition of the
basis of private property, with the communistic regulation of production (and, implicit in this, the
destruction of the alien relation between men and what they themselves produce), the power of the
relation of supply and demand is dissolved into nothing, and men get exchange, production, the mode of
their mutual relation, under their own control again?
In history up to the present it is certainly an empirical fact that separate individuals have, with the
broadening of their activity into world-historical activity, become more and more enslaved under a power
alien to them (a pressure which they have conceived of as a dirty trick on the part of the so-called
universal spirit, etc.), a power which has become more and more enormous and, in the last instance, turns
out to be the world market. But it is just as empirically established that, by the overthrow of the existing
state of society by the communist revolution (of which more below) and the abolition of private property
which is identical with it, this power, which so baffles the German theoreticians, will be dissolved; and
that then the liberation of each single individual will be accomplished in the measure in which history
becomes transformed into world history. From the above it is clear that the real intellectual wealth of the
individual depends entirely on the wealth of his real connections. Only then will the separate individuals
be liberated from the various national and local barriers, be brought into practical connection with the
material and intellectual production of the whole world and be put in a position to acquire the capacity to
enjoy this all-sided production of the whole earth (the creations of man). All-round dependence, this
natural form of the world-historical co-operation of individuals, will be transformed by this communist
revolution into the control and conscious mastery of these powers, which, born of the action of men on
one another, have till now overawed and governed men as powers completely alien to them. Now this
view can be expressed again in speculative-idealistic, i.e. fantastic, terms as "self-generation of the
species" ("society as the subject"), and thereby the consecutive series of interrelated individuals
connected with each other can be conceived as a single individual, which accomplishes the mystery of
generating itself. It is clear here that individuals certainly make one another, physically and mentally, but
do not make themselves.
This "alienation" (to use a term which will be comprehensible to the philosophers) can, of course, only be
abolished given two practical premises. For it to become an "intolerable" power, i.e. a power against
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (10 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]
which men make a revolution, it must necessarily have rendered the great mass of humanity
"propertyless", and produced, at the same time, the contradiction of an existing world of wealth and
culture, both of which conditions presuppose a great increase in productive power, a high degree of its
development. And, on the other hand, this development of productive forces (which itself implies the
actual empirical existence of men in their world-historical, instead of local, being) is an absolutely
necessary practical premise because without it want is merely made general, and with destitution the
struggle for necessities and all the old filthy business would necessarily be reproduced; and furthermore,
because only with this universal development of productive forces is a universal intercourse between
men established, which produces in all nations simultaneously the phenomenon of the "propertyless"
mass (universal competition), makes each nation dependent on the revolutions of the others, and finally
has put world-historical, empirically universal individuals in place of local ones. Without this, (i)
communism could only exist as a local event; (2) the forces of intercourse themselves could not have
developed as universal, hence intolerable powers: they would have remained home-bred conditions
surrounded by superstition; and (3) each extension of intercourse would abolish local communism.
Empirically, communism is only possible as the act of the dominant peoples "all at once" and
simultaneously, which presupposes the universal development of productive forces and the world
intercourse bound up with communism. Moreover, the mass of propertyless workers -- the utterly
precarious position of labour -- power on a mass scale cut off from capital or from even a limited
satisfaction and, therefore, no longer merely temporarily deprived of work itself as a secure source of life
-- presupposes the world market through competition. The proletariat can thus only exist
world-historically, just as communism, its activity, can only have a "world-historical" existence.
World-historical existence of individuals means existence of individuals which is directly linked up with
world history.
Communism is for us not a state of affairs which is to be established, an ideal to which reality [will] have
to adjust itself. We call communism the real movement which abolishes the present state of things. The
conditions of this movement result from the premises now in existence.
FOOTNOTES
[1] The building of houses. With savages each family has as a matter of course its own cave or hut like
the separate family tent of the nomads. This separate domestic economy is made only the more necessary
by the further development of private property. With the agricultural peoples a communal domestic
economy is just as impossible as a communal cultivation of the soil. A great advance was the building of
towns. In all previous periods, however, the abolition of individual economy, which is inseparable from
the abolition of private property, was impossible for the simple reason that the material conditions
governing it were not present. The setting-up of a communal domestic economy presupposes the
development of machinery, of the use of natural forces and of many other productive forces -- e.g. of
water-supplies, of gas-lighting, steam-heating, etc., the removal [of the antagonism] of town and country.
Without these conditions a communal economy would not in itself form a new productive force; lacking
any material basis and resting on a purely theoretical foundation, it would be a mere freak and would end
in nothing more than a monastic economy -- What was possible can be seen in the towns brought about
by condensation and the erection of communal buildings for various definite purposes (prisons, barracks,
etc.). That the abolition of individual economy is inseparable from the abolition of the family is
self-evident.
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (11 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]
[2] [This paragraph appears as a marginal note in the manuscript -- Ed.] And out of this very
contradiction between the interest of the individual and that of the community the latter takes an
independent form as the State, divorced from the real interests of individual and community, and at the
same time as an illusory communal life, always based, however, on the real ties existing in every family
and tribal conglomeration -- such as flesh and blood, language, division of labour on a larger scale, and
other interests-and especially, as we shall enlarge upon later, on the classes, already determined by the
division of labour, which in every such mass of men separate out, and of which one dominates all the
others. It follows from this that all struggles within the State, the struggle between democracy,
aristocracy, and monarchy, the struggle for the franchise, etc., etc., are merely the illusory forms in which
the real struggles of the different classes are fought out among one another (of this the German
theoreticians have not the faintest inkling, although they have received a sufficient introduction to the
subject in the Deutsch-Franz\F6sische Jahrb\FCcher and Die heilige Familie). Further, it follows that every
class which is struggling for mastery, even when its domination, as is the case with the proletariat,
postulates the abolition of the old form of society in its entirety and of domination itself, must first
conquer for itself political power in order to represent its interest in turn as the general interest, which in
the first moment it is forced to do. Just because individuals seek only their particular interest, which
fothem does not coincide with their communal interest (in fact the general is the illusory form of
communal life), the latter will be imposed on them as an interest "alien" to them, and "independent" of
them as in its turn a particular, peculiar "general" interest; or they themselves must remain within this
discord, as in democracy. On the other hind, too, the practical struggle of these particular interests, which
constantly really run counter to the communal and illusory communal interests, makes practical
intervention and control necessary through the illusory "general" interest in the form of the State.
Next Section
Table of Contents for The German Ideology
Marxist Writers Archive
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (12 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]
Karl Marx
THE GERMAN IDEOLOGY
Part I
FEUERBACH.
OPPOSTION OF THE MATERIALIST
AND IDEALIST OUTLOOK
B. THE ILLUSION OF THE EPOCH
Civil Society and the Conception of History
The form of intercourse determined by the existing productive forces at all previous historical stages, and
in its turn determining these, is civil society. The latter, as is clear from what we have said above, has as
its premises and basis the simple family and the multiple, the so-called tribe, the more precise
determinants of this society are enumerated in our remarks above. Already here we see how this civil
society is the true source and theatre of all history, and how absurd is the conception of history held
hitherto, which neglects the real relationships and confines itself to high-sounding dramas of princes and
states.
Civil society embraces the whole material intercourse of individuals within a definite stage of the
development of productive forces. It embraces the whole commercial and industrial life of a given stage
and, insofar, transcends the State and the nation, though, on the other hand again, it must assert itself in
its foreign relations as nationality, and inwardly must organise itself as State. The word "civil society"
[b\FCrgerliche Gesellschaft] emerged in the eighteenth century, when property relationships had already
extricated themselves from the ancient and medieval communal society. Civil society as such only
develops with the bourgeoisie; the social organisation evolving directly out of production and commerce,
which in all ages forms the basis of the State and of the rest of the idealistic superstructure, has, however,
always been designated by the same name.
History is nothing but the succession of the separate generations, each of which exploits the materials,
the capital funds, the productive forces handed down to it by all preceding generations, and thus, on the
one hand, continues the traditional activity in completely changed circumstances and, on the other,
modifies the old circumstances with a completely changed activity. This can be speculatively distorted so
that later history is made the goal of earlier history, e.g. the goal ascribed to the discovery of America is
to further the eruption of the French Revolution. Thereby history receives its own special aims and
becomes "a person rating with other persons" (to wit: "Self-Consciousness, Criticism, the Unique", etc.),
while what is designated with the words "destiny", "goal", "germ", or "idea" of earlier history is nothing
more than an abstraction formed from later history, from the active influence which earlier history
exercises on later history.
The further the separate spheres, which interact on one another, extend in the course of this development,
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (1 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]
the more the original isolation of the separate nationalities is destroyed by the developed mode of
production and intercourse and the division of labour between various nations naturally brought forth by
these, the more history becomes world history. Thus, for instance, if in England a machine is invented,
which deprives countless workers of bread in India and China, and overturns the whole form of existence
of these empires, this invention becomes a world-historical fact. Or again, take the case of sugar and
coffee which have proved their world-historical importance in the nineteenth century by the fact that the
lack of these products, occasioned by the Napoleonic Continental System, caused the Germans to rise
against Napoleon, and thus became the real basis of the glorious Wars of liberation of 1813. From this it
follows that this transformation of history into world history is not indeed a mere abstract act on the part
of the "self-consciousness", the world spirit, or of any other metaphysical spectre, but a quite material,
empirically verifiable act, an act the proof of which every individual furnishes as he comes and goes,
eats, drinks and clothes himself.
This conception of history depends on our ability to expound the real process of production, starting out
from the material production of life itself, and to comprehend the form of intercourse connected with this
and created by this mode of production (i.e. civil society in its various stages), as the basis of all history;
and to show it in its action as State, to explain all the different theoretical products and forms of
consciousness, religion, philosophy, ethics, etc. etc. and trace their origins and growth from that basis; by
which means, of course, the whole thing can be depicted in its totality (and therefore, too, the reciprocal
action of these various sides on one another). It has not, like the idealistic view of history, in every period
to look for a category, but remains constantly on the real ground of history; it does not explain practice
from the idea but explains the formation of ideas from material practice; and accordingly it comes to the
conclusion that all forms and products of consciousness cannot be dissolved by mental criticism, by
resolution into "self-consciousness" or transformation into "apparitions", "spectres", "fancies", etc. but
only by the practical overthrow of the actual social relations which gave rise to this idealistic humbug;
that not criticism but revolution is the driving force of history, also of religion, of philosophy and all
other types of theory. It shows that history does not end by being resolved into "self-consciousness as
spirit of the spirit", but that in it at each stage there is found a material result: a sum of productive forces,
an historically created relation of individuals to nature and to one another, which is handed down to each
generation from its predecessor; a mass of productive forces, capital funds and conditions, which, on the
one hand, is indeed modified by the new generation, but also on the other prescribes for it its conditions
of life and gives it a definite development, a special character. It shows that circumstances make men just
as much as men make circumstances.
This sum of productive forces, capital funds and social forms of intercourse, which every individual and
generation finds in existence as something given, is the real basis of what the philosophers have
conceived as "substance" and "essence of man", and what they have deified and attacked; a real basis
which is not in the least disturbed, in its effect and influence on the development of men, by the fact that
these philosophers revolt against it as "self-consciousness" and the "Unique". These conditions of life,
which different generations find in existence, decide also whether or not the periodically recurring
revolutionary convulsion will be strong enough to overthrow the basis of the entire existing system. And
if these material elements of a complete revolution are not present (namely, on the one hand the existing
productive forces, on the other the formation of a revolutionary mass, which revolts not only against
separate conditions of society up till then, but against the very "production of life" till then, the "total
activity" on which it was based), then, as far as practical development is concerned, it is absolutely
immaterial whether the idea of this revolution has been expressed a hundred times already, as the history
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (2 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]
of communism proves.
In the whole conception of history up to the present this real basis of history has either been totally
neglected or else considered as a minor matter quite irrelevant to the course of history. History must,
therefore, always be written according to an extraneous standard; the real production of life seems to be
primeval history, while the truly historical appears to be separated from ordinary life, something
extra-superterrestrial. With this the relation of man to nature is excluded from history and hence the
antithesis of nature and history is created. The exponents of this conception of history have consequently
only been able to see in history the political actions of princes and States, religious and all sorts of
theoretical struggles, and in particular in each historical epoch have had to share the illusion of that
epoch. For instance, if an epoch imagines itself to be actuated by purely "political" or "religious"
motives, although "religion" and "politics" are only forms of its true motives, the historian accepts this
opinion. The "idea", the "conception" of the people in question about their real practice, is transformed
into the sole determining, active force, which controls and determines their practice. When the crude
form in which the division of labour appears with the Indians and Egyptians calls forth the caste-system
in their State and religion, the historian believes that the caste-system is the power which has produced
this crude social form. While the French and the English at least hold by the political illusion, which is
moderately close to reality, the Germans move in the realm of the "pure spirit", and make religious
illusion the driving force of history. The Hegelian philosophy of history is the last consequence, reduced
to its "finest expression", of all this German historiography, for which it is not a question of real, nor
even of political, interests, but of pure thoughts, which consequently must appear to Saint Bruno as a
series of "thoughts" that devour one another and are finally swallowed up in "self-consciousness". ------
[(So-called objective historiography just consists in treating the historical conditions independent of
activity. Reactionary character.) marginal note by Marx -- Ed.)
Feuerbach: Philosophic, and Real, Liberation
[. . . .] It is also clear from these arguments how grossly Feuerbach is deceiving himself when (Wigand's
Vierteljahrsschrift, 1845, Band 2) by virtue of the qualification "common man" he declares himself a
communist, transforms the latter into a predicate of "man", and thereby thinks it possible to change the
word "communist", which in the real world means the follower of a definite revolutionary party, into a
mere category. Feuerbach's whole deduction with regard to the relation of men to one another goes only
so far as to prove that men need and always have needed each other. He wants to establish consciousness
of this fact, that is to say, like the other theorists, merely to produce a correct consciousness about an
existing fact; whereas for the real communist it is a question of overthrowing the existing state of things.
We thoroughly appreciate, moreover, that Feuerbach, in endeavouring to produce consciousness of just
this fact, is going as far as a theorist possibly can, without ceasing to be a theorist and philosopher....
As an example of Feuerbach's acceptance and at the same time misunderstanding of existing reality,
which he still shares with our opponents, we recall the passage in the Philosophie der Zukunft where he
develops the view that the existence of a thing or a man is at the same time its or his essence, that the
conditions of existence, the mode of life and activity of an animal or human individual are those in which
its "essence" feels itself satisfied. Here every exception is expressly conceived as an unhappy chance, as
an abnormality which cannot be altered. Thus if millions of proletarians feel by no means contented with
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (3 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]
their living conditions, if their "existence" does not in the least correspond to their "essence", then,
according to the passage quoted, this is an unavoidable misfortune, which must be borne quietly. The
millions of proletarians and communists, however, think differently and will prove this in time, when
they bring their "existence" into harmony with their "essence" in a practical way, by means of a
revolution. Feuerbach, therefore, never speaks of the world of man in such cases, but always takes refuge
in external nature, and moreover in nature which has not yet been subdued by men. But every new
invention, every advance made by industry, detaches another piece from this domain, so that the ground
which produces examples illustrating such Feuerbachian propositions is steadily shrinking.
[. . . .] We shall, of course, not take the trouble to enlighten our wise philosophers by explaining to them
that the "liberation" of man is not advanced a single step by reducing philosophy, theology, substance
and all the trash to "self-consciousness" and by liberating man from the domination of these phrases,
which have never held him in thrall. Nor will we explain to them that it is only possible to achieve real
liberation in the real world and by employing real means, that slavery cannot be abolished without the
steam-engine and the mule and spinning-jenny, serfdom cannot be abolished without improved
agriculture, and that, in general, people cannot be liberated as long as they are unable to obtain food and
drink, housing and clothing in adequate quality and quantity. "Liberation" is an historical and not a
mental act, and it is brought about by historical conditions, the development of industry, commerce,
agriculture, the conditions of intercourse. . . . [1]
In Germany, a country where only a trivial historical development is taking place, these mental
developments, these glorified and ineffective trivialities, naturally serve as a substitute for the lack of
historical development, and they take root and have to be combated. But this fight is of local importance.
In reality and for the practical materialist, i.e. the communist, it is a question of revolutionising the
existing world, of practically attacking and changing existing things. When occasionally we find such
views with Feuerbach, they are never more than isolated surmises and have much too little influence on
his general outlook to be considered here as anything else than embryos capable of development.
Feuerbach's conception of the sensuous world is confined on the one hand to mere contemplation of it,
and on the other to mere feeling; he says "Man" instead of "real historical man". "Man" is really "the
German". In the first case, the contemplation of the sensuous world, he necessarily lights on things which
contradict his consciousness and feeling, which disturb the harmony he presupposes, the harmony of all
parts of the sensuous world and especially of man and nature. To remove this disturbance, he must take
refuge in a double perception, a profane one which only perceives the "flatly obvious" and a higher,
philosophical, one which perceives the "true essence" of things. He does not see how the sensuous world
around him is, not a thing given direct from all eternity, remaining ever the same, but the product of
industry and of the state of society; and, indeed, in the sense that it is an historical product, the result of
the activity of a whole succession of generations, each standing on the shoulders of the preceding one,
developing its industry and its intercourse, modifying its social system according to the changed needs.
Even the objects of the simplest "sensuous certainty" are only given him through social development,
industry and commercial intercourse. The cherry-tree, like almost all fruit-trees, was, as is well known,
only a few centuries ago transplanted by commerce into our zone, and therefore only by this action of a
definite society in a definite age it has become "sensuous certainty" for Feuerbach.
Incidentally, when we conceive things thus, as they really are and happened, every profound
philosophical problem is resolved, as will be seen even more clearly later, quite simply into an empirical
fact. For instance, the important question of the relation of man to nature (Bruno [Bauer] goes so far as to
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (4 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]
speak of "the antitheses in nature and history" (p. 110), as though these were two separate "things" and
man did not always have before him an historical nature and a natural history) out of which all the
"unfathomably lofty works" on "substance" and "self-consciousness" were born, crumbles of itself when
we understand that the celebrated "unity of man with nature" has always existed in industry and has
existed in varying forms in every epoch according to the lesser or greater development of industry, just
like the "struggle" of man with nature, right up to the development of his productive powers on a
corresponding basis. Industry and commerce, production and the exchange of the necessities of life,
themselves determine distribution, the structure of the different social classes and are, in turn, determined
by it as to the mode in which they are carried on; and so it happens that in Manchester, for instance,
Feuerbach sees only factories and machines, where a hundred years ago only spinning-wheels and
weaving-rooms were to be seen, or in the Campagna of Rome he finds only pasture lands and swamps,
where in the time of Augustus he would have found nothing but the vineyards and villas of Roman
capitalists. Feuerbach speaks in particular of the perception of natural science; he mentions secrets which
are disclosed only to the eye of the physicist and chemist; but where would natural science be without
industry and commerce? Even this pure natural science is provided with an aim, as with its material, only
through trade and industry, through the sensuous activity of men. So much is this activity, this unceasing
sensuous labour and creation, this production, the basis of the whole sensuous world as it now exists,
that, were it interrupted only for a year, Feuerbach would not only find an enormous change in the
natural world, but would very soon find that the whole world of men and his own perceptive faculty, nay
his own existence, were missing. Of course, in all this the priority of external nature remains unassailed,
and all this has no application to the original men produced by generatio aequivoca; [Spontaneous
generation. -- Ed.] but this differentiation has meaning only insofar as man is considered to be distinct
from nature. For that matter, nature, the nature that preceded human history, is not by any means the
nature in which Feuerbach lives, it is nature which today no longer exists anywhere (except perhaps on a
few Australian coral-islands of recent origin) and which, therefore, does not exist for Feuerbach.
Certainly Feuerbach has a great advantage over the "pure" materialists in that he realises how man too is
an "object of the senses. But apart from the fact that he only conceives him as an "object of the senses,
not as sensuous activity", because he still remains in the realm of theory and conceives of men not in
their given social connection, not under their existing conditions of life, which have made them what
they are, he never arrives at the really existing active men, but stops at the abstraction "man", and gets no
further than recognising "the true,
individual, corporeal man,' emotionally, i.e. he knows no other "human relationships" "of man to man"
than love and friendship, and even then idealised. He gives no criticism of the present conditions of life.
Thus he never manages to conceive the sensuous world as the total living sensuous activity of the
individuals composing it; and therefore when, for example, he sees instead of healthy men a crowd of
scrofulous, overworked and consumptive starvelings, he is compelled to take refuge in the "higher
perception" and in the ideal "compensation in the species", and thus to relapse into idealism at the very
point where the communist materialist sees the necessity, and at the same time the condition, of a
transformation both of industry and of the social structure.
As far as Feuerbach is a materialist he does not deal with history, and as far as he considers history he is
not a materialist. With him materialism and history diverge completely, a fact which incidentally is
already obvious from what has been said.
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (5 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]
Ruling Class and Ruling Ideas
The ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas, i.e. the class which is the ruling material
force of society, is at the same time its ruling intellectual force. The class which has the means of
material production at its disposal, has control at the same time over the means of mental production, so
that thereby, generally speaking, the ideas of those who lack the means of mental production are subject
to it. The ruling ideas are nothing more than the ideal expression of the dominant material relationships,
the dominant material relationships grasped as ideas; hence of the relationships which make the one class
the ruling one, therefore, the ideas of its dominance. The individuals composing the ruling class possess
among other things consciousness, and therefore think. Insofar, therefore, as they rule as a class and
determine the extent and compass of an epoch, it is self-evident that they do this in its whole range,
hence among other things rule also as thinkers, as producers of ideas, and regulate the production and
distribution of the ideas of their age: thus their ideas are the ruling ideas of the epoch. For instance, in an
age and in a country where royal power, aristocracy, and bourgeoisie are contending for mastery and
where, therefore, mastery is shared, the doctrine of the separation of powers proves to be the dominant
idea and is expressed as an "eternal law".
The division of labour, which we already saw above as one of the chief forces of history up till now,
manifests itself also in the ruling class as the division of mental and material labour, so that inside this
class one part appears as the thinkers of the class (its active, conceptive ideologists, who make the
perfecting of the illusion of the class about itself their chief source of livelihood), while the others'
attitude to these ideas and illusions is more passive and receptive, because they are in reality the active
members of this class and have less time to make up illusions and ideas about themselves. Within this
class this cleavage can even develop into a certain opposition and hostility between the two parts, which,
however, in the case of a practical collision, in which the class itself is endangered, automatically comes
to nothing, in which case there also vanishes the semblance that the ruling ideas were not the ideas of the
ruling class and had a power distinct from the power of this class. The existence of revolutionary ideas in
a particular period presupposes the existence of a revolutionary class; about the premises for the latter
sufficient has already been said above.
If now in considering the course of history we detach the ideas of the ruling class from the ruling class
itself and attribute to them an independent existence, if we confine ourselves to saying that these or those
ideas were dominant at a given time, without bothering ourselves about the conditions of production and
the producers of these ideas, if we thus ignore the individuals and world conditions which are the source
of the ideas, we can say, for instance, that during the time that the aristocracy was dominant, the concepts
honour, loyalty, etc. were dominant, during the dominance of the bourgeoisie the concepts freedom,
equality, etc. The ruling class itself on the whole Imagines this to be so. This conception of history,
which is common to all historians, particularly since the eighteenth century, will necessarily come up
against the phenomenon that increasingly abstract ideas hold sway, i.e. ideas which increasingly take on
the form of universality. For each new class which puts itself in the place of one ruling before it, is
compelled, merely in order to carry through its aim, to represent its interest as the common interest of all
the members of society, that is, expressed in ideal form: it has to give its ideas the form of universality,
and represent them as the only rational, universally valid ones. The class making a revolution appears
from the very start, if only because it is opposed to a class, not as a class but as the representative of the
whole of society; it appears as the whole mass of society confronting the one ruling class. [2] It can do
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (6 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]
this because, to start with, its interest really is more connected with the common interest of all other
non-ruling classes, because under the pressure of hitherto existing conditions its interest has not yet been
able to develop as the particular interest of a particular class. Its victory, therefore, benefits also many
individuals of the other classes which are not winning a dominant position, but only insofar as it now
puts these individuals in a position to raise themselves into the ruling class. When the French bourgeoisie
overthrew the power of the aristocracy, it thereby made it possible for many proletarians to raise
themselves above the proletariat, but only insofar as they become bourgeois. Every new class, therefore,
achieves its hegemony only on a broader basis than that of the class ruling previously, whereas the
opposition of the non-ruling class against the new ruling class later develops all the more sharply and
profoundly. Both these things determine the fact that the struggle to be waged against this new ruling
class, in its turn, aims at a more decided and radical negation of the previous conditions of society than
could all previous classes which sought to rule.
This whole semblance, that the rule of a certain class is only the rule of certain ideas, comes to a natural
end, of course, as soon as class rule in general ceases to be the form in which society is organised, that is
to say, as soon as it is no longer necessary to represent a particular interest as general or the "general
interest" as ruling.
Once the ruling ideas have been separated from the ruling individuals and, above all, from the
relationships which result from a given stage of the mode of production, and in this way the conclusion
has been reached that history is always under the sway of ideas, it is very easy to abstract from these
various ideas "the idea", the notion, etc. as the dominant force in history, and thus to understand all these
separate ideas and concepts as "forms of self-determination" on the part of the concept developing in
history. It follows then naturally, too, that all the relationships of men can be derived from the concept of
man, man as conceived, the essence of man, Man. This has been done by the speculative philosophers.
Hegel himself confesses at the end of the Geschichtsphilosophie that he "has considered the progress of
the concept only" and has represented in history the "true theodicy". (p.446.) Now one can go back again
to the producers of the "concept", to the theorists, ideologists and philosophers, and one comes then to
the conclusion that the philosophers, the thinkers as such, have at all times been dominant in history: a
conclusion, as we see, already expressed by Hegel. The whole trick of proving the hegemony of the spirit
in history (hierarchy Stirner calls it) is thus confirmed to the following three efforts.
No. 1. One must separate the ideas of those ruling for empirical reasons, under empirical conditions and
as empirical individuals, from these actual rulers, and thus recognise the rule of ideas or illusions in
history.
No. 2. One must bring an order into this rule of ideas, prove a mystical connection among the successive
ruling ideas, which is managed by understanding them as "acts of self-determination on the part of the
concept" (this is possible because by virtue of their empirical basis these ideas are really connected with
one another and because, conceived as mere ideas, they become self-distinctions, distinctions made by
thought).
No. 3. To remove the mystical appearance of this "self-determining concept" it is changed into a person
-- "Self-Consciousness" -- or, to appear thoroughly materialistic, into a series of persons, who represent
the "concept" in history, into the "thinkers", the "philosophers", the ideologists, who again are understood
as the manufacturers of history, as the "council of guardians", as the rulers. Thus the whole body of
materialistic elements has been removed from history and now full rein can be given to the speculative
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (7 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]
steed.
Whilst in ordinary life every shopkeeper is very well able to distinguish between what somebody
professes to be and what he really is, our historians have not yet won even this trivial insight. They take
every epoch at its word and believe that everything it says and imagines about itself is true.
This historical method which reigned in Germany, and especially the reason why, must be understood
from its connection with the illusion of ideologists in general, e.g. the illusions of the jurist, politicians
(of the practical statesmen among them, too), from the dogmatic dreamings and distortions of these
fellows; this is explained perfectly easily from their practical position in life, their job, and the division of
labour.
FOOTNOTES
1. There is here a gap in the manuscript.
2. [Marginal note by Marx:] Universality corresponds to (1) the class versus the estate, (2) the
competition, world-wide intercourse, etc., (3) the great numerical strength of the ruling class, (4) the
illusion of the common interests (in the beginning this illusion is true), (5) the delusion of the ideologists
and the division of labour.
Next Section
Table of Contents for The German Ideology
Marxist Writers Archive
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (8 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]
Karl Marx
THE GERMAN IDEOLOGY
Part I
FEUERBACH.
OPPOSTION OF THE MATERIALIST
AND IDEALIST OUTLOOK
C. THE REAL BASIS OF IDEOLOGY
Division of Labour: Town and Country
[. . . .] [1] From the first there follows the premise of a highly developed division of labour and an
extensive commerce; from the second, the locality. In the first case the individuals must be brought
together; in the second they find themselves alongside the given instrument of production as instruments
of production themselves. Here, therefore, arises the difference between natural instruments of
production and those created by civilisation. The field (water, etc.) can be regarded as a natural
instrument of production. In the first case, that of the natural instrument of production, individuals are
subservient to nature; in the second, to a product of labour. In the first case, therefore, property (landed
property) appears as direct natural domination, in the second, as domination of labour, particularly of
accumulated labour, capital. The first case presupposes that the individuals are united by some bond:
family, tribe, the land itself, etc.; the second, that they are independent of one another and are only held
together by exchange. In the first case, what is involved is chiefly an exchange between men and nature
in which the labour of the former is exchanged for the products of the latter; in the second, it is
predominantly an exchange of men among themselves. In the first case, average, human common sense
is adequate -- physical activity is as yet not separated from mental activity; in the second, the division
between physical and mental labour must already be practically completed. In the first case, the
domination of the proprietor over the propertyless may be based on a personal relationship, on a kind of
community; in the second, it must have taken on a material shape in a third party-money. In the first case,
small industry exists, but determined by the utilisation of the natural instrument of production and
therefore without the distribution of labour among various individuals; in the second, industry exists only
in and through the division of labour.
The greatest division of material and mental labour is the separation of town and country. The
antagonism between town and country begins with the transition from barbarism to civilisation, from
tribe to State, from locality to nation, and runs through the whole history of civilisation to the present day
(the Anti-Corn Law League).
The existence of the town implies, at the same time, the necessity of administration, police, taxes, etc.; in
short, of the municipality, and thus of politics in general. Here first became manifest the division of the
population into two great classes, which is directly based on the division of labour and on the instruments
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (1 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]
of production. The town already is in actual fact the concentration of the population, of the instruments
of production, of capital, of pleasures, of needs, while the country demonstrates just the opposite fact,
isolation and separation. The antagonism between town and country can only exist within the framework
of private property. It is the most crass expression of the subjection of the individual under the division
of labour, under a definite activity forced upon him -- a subjection which makes one man into a restricted
town-animal, the other into a restricted country-animal, and daily creates anew the conflict between their
interests. Labour is here again the chief thing, power over individuals, and as long as the latter exists,
private property must exist. The abolition of the antagonism between town and country is one of the first
conditions of communal life, a condition which again depends on a mass of material premises and which
cannot be fulfilled by the mere will, as anyone can see at the first glance. (These conditions have still to
be enumerated.) The separation of town and country can also be understood as the separation of capital
and landed property, as the beginning of the existence and development of capital independent of landed
property -- the beginning of property having its basis only in labour and exchange.
In the towns which, in the Middle Ages, did not derive ready-made from an earlier period but were
formed anew by the serfs who had become free, each man's own particular labour was his only property
apart from the small capital he brought with him, consisting almost solely of the most necessary tools of
his craft. The competition of serfs constantly escaping into the town, the constant war of the country
against the towns and thus the necessity of an organised municipal military force, the bond of common
ownership in a particular kind of labour, the necessity of common buildings for the sale of their wares at
a time when craftsmen were also traders, and the consequent exclusion of the unauthorised from these
buildings, the conflict among the interests of the various crafts, the necessity of protecting their
laboriously acquired skill, and the feudal organisation of the whole of the country: these were the causes
of the union of the workers of each craft in guilds. We have not at this point to go further into the
manifold modifications of the guild-system, which arise through later historical developments. The flight
of the serfs into the towns went on without interruption right through the Middle Ages. These serfs,
persecuted by their lords in the country, came separately into the towns, where they found an organised
community, against which they were powerless and in which they had to subject themselves to the
station assigned to them by the demand for their labour and the interest of their organised urban
competitors. These workers, entering separately, were never able to attain to any power, since, if their
labour was of the guild type which had to be learned, the guild-masters bent them to their will and
organised them according to their interest; or if their labour was not such as had to be learned, and
therefore not of the guild type, they became day-labourers and never managed to organise, remaining an
unorganised rabble. The need for day-labourers in the towns created the rabble.
These towns were true "associations", called forth by the direct need, the care of providing for the
protection of property, and of multiplying the means of production and defence of the separate members.
The rabble of these towns was devoid of any power, composed as it was of individuals strange to one
another who had entered separately, and who stood unorganised over against an organised power, armed
for war, and jealously watching over them. The journeymen and apprentices were organised in each craft
as it best suited the interest of the masters. The patriarchal relationship existing between them and their
masters gave the latter a double power -- on the one hand because of their influence on the whole life of
the journeymen, and on the other because, for the journeymen who worked with the same master, it was
a real bond which held them together against the journeymen of other masters and separated them from
these. And finally, the journeymen were bound to the existing order by their simple interest in becoming
masters themselves. While, therefore, the rabble at least carried out revolts against the whole municipal
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (2 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]
order, revolts which remained completely ineffective because of their powerlessness, the journeymen
never got further than small acts of insubordination within separate guilds, such as belong to the very
nature of the guild-system. The great risings of the Middle Ages all radiated from the country, but
equally remained totally ineffective because of the isolation and consequent crudity of the peasants.
In the towns, the division of labour between the individual guilds was as yet [quite naturally derived]
and, in the guilds themselves, not at all developed between the individual workers. Every workman had
to be versed in a whole round of tasks, had to be able to make everything that was to be made with his
tools. The limited commerce and the scanty communication between the individual towns, the lack of
population and the narrow needs did not allow of a higher division of labour, and therefore every man
who wished to become a master had to be proficient in the whole of his craft. Thus there is found with
medieval craftsmen an interest in their special work and in proficiency in it, which was capable of rising
to a narrow artistic sense. For this very reason, however, every medieval craftsman was completely
absorbed in his work, to which he had a contented, slavish relationship, and to which he was subjected to
a far greater extent than the modern worker, whose work is a matter of indifference to him.
Capital in these towns was a naturally derived capital, consisting of a house, the tools of the craft, and the
natural, hereditary customers; and not being realisable, on account of the backwardness of commerce and
the lack of circulation, it descended from father to son. Unlike modern capital, which can be assessed in
money and which may be indifferently invested in this thing or that, this capital was directly connected
with the particular work of the owner, inseparable from it and to this extent estate capital.
The next extension of the division of labour was the separation of production and commerce, the
formation of a special class of mer-chants; a separation which, in the towns bequeathed by a former
period, had been handed down (among other things with the Jews) and which very soon appeared in the
newly formed ones. With this there was given the possibility of commercial communications
transcending the immediate neighbourhood, a possibility, the realisation of which depended on the
existing means of communication, the state of public safety in the countryside, which was determined by
political conditions (during the whole of the Middle Ages, as is well known, the merchants travelled in
armed caravans), and on the cruder or more advanced needs (determined by the stage of culture attained)
of the region accessible to intercourse.
With commerce the prerogative of a particular class, with the extension of trade through the merchants
beyond the immediate surroundings of the town, there immediately appears a reciprocal action between
production and commerce. The towns enter into relations with one another, new tools are brought from
one town into the other, and the separation between production and commerce soon calls forth a new
division of production between the individual towns, each of which is soon exploiting a predominant
branch of industry. The local restrictions of earlier times begin gradually to be broken down.
It depends purely on the extension of commerce whether the productive forces achieved in a locality,
especially inventions, are lost for later development or not. As long as there exists no commerce
transcending the immediate neighbourhood, every invention must be made separately in each locality,
and mere chances such as irruptions of barbaric peoples, even ordinary wars, are sufficient to cause a
country with advanced productive forces and needs to have to start right over again from the beginning.
In primitive history every invention had to be made daily anew and in each locality independently. How
little highly developed productive forces are safe from complete destruction, given even a relatively very
extensive commerce, is proved by the Phoenicians, whose inventions were for the most part lost for a
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (3 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]
long time to come through the ousting of this nation from commerce, its conquest by Alexander and its
consequent decline. Likewise, for instance, glass-painting in the Middle Ages. Only when commerce has
become world commerce and has as its basis large-scale industry, when all nations are drawn into the
competitive struggle, is the permanence of the acquired productive forces assured.
The Rise of Manufacturing
The immediate consequence of the division of labour between the various towns was the rise of
manufactures, branches of production which had outgrown the guild-system. Manufactures first
flourished, in Italy and later in Flanders, under the historical premise of commerce with foreign nations.
In other countries, England and France for example, manufactures were at first confined to the home
market. Besides the premises already mentioned manufactures depend on an already advanced
concentration of population, particularly in the countryside, and of capital, which began to accumulate in
the hands of individuals, partly in the guilds in spite of the guild regulations, partly among the merchants.
That labour which from the first presupposed a machine, even of the crudest sort, soon showed itself the
most capable of development. Weaving, earlier carried on in the country by the peasants as a secondary
occupation to procure their clothing, was the first labour to receive an impetus and a further development
through the extension of commerce. Weaving was the first and remained the principal manufacture. The
rising demand for clothing materials, consequent on the growth of population, the growing accumulation
and mobilisation of natural capital through accelerated circulation, the demand for luxuries called forth
by the latter and favoured generally by the gradual extension of commerce, gave weaving a quantitative
and qualitative stimulus, which wrenched it out of the form of production hitherto existing. Alongside the
peasants weaving for their own use, who continued, and still continue, with this sort of work, there
emerged a new class of weavers in the towns, whose fabrics were destined for the whole home market
and usually for foreign markets too.
Weaving, an occupation demanding in most cases little skill and soon splitting up into countless
branches, by its whole nature resisted the trammels of the guild. Weaving was, therefore, carried on
mostly in villages and market-centres without guild organisation, which gradually became towns, and
indeed the most flourishing towns in each land.
With guild-free manufacture, property relations also quickly changed. The first advance beyond naturally
derived estate capital was provided by the rise of merchants whose capital was from the beginning
movable, capital in the modern sense as far as one can speak of it, given the circumstances of those
times. The second advance came with manufacture, which again made mobile a mass of natural capital,
and altogether increased the mass of movable capital as against that of natural capital.
At the same time, manufacture became a refuge of the peasants from the guilds which excluded them or
paid them badly, just as earlier the guild-towns had [served] as a refuge for the peasants from [the
oppressive landed nobility].
Simultaneously with the beginning of manufactures there was a period of vagabondage caused by the
abolition of the feudal bodies of retainers, the disbanding of the swollen armies which had flocked to
serve the kings against their vassals, the improvement of agriculture, and the transformation of great
strips of tillage into pasture land. From this alone it is clear how this vagabondage is strictly connected
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (4 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]
with the disintegration of the feudal system. As early as the thirteenth century we find isolated epochs of
this kind, but only at the end of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth does this vagabondage make
a general and permanent appearance. These vagabonds, who were so numerous that, for instance, Henry
VIII of England had 72,000 of them hanged, were only prevailed upon to work with the greatest
difficulty and through the most extreme necessity, and then only after long resistance. The rapid rise of
manufactures, particularly in England, absorbed them gradually.
With the advent of manufactures, the various nations entered into a competitive relationship, the struggle
for trade, which was fought out in wars, protective duties and prohibitions, whereas earlier the nations,
insofar as they were connected at all, had carried on an inoffensive exchange with each other. Trade had
from now on a political significance.
With the advent of manufacture the relationship between worker and employer changed. In the guilds the
patriarchal relationship between journeyman and master continued to exist; in manufacture its place was
taken by the monetary relation between worker and capitalist -- a relationship which in the countryside
and in small towns retained a patriarchal tinge, but in the larger, the real manufacturing towns, quite early
lost almost all patriarchal complexion.
Manufacture and the movement of production in general received an enormous impetus through the
extension of commerce which came with the discovery of America and the sea-route to the East Indies.
The new products imported thence, particularly the masses of gold and silver which came into circulation
and totally changed the position of the classes towards one another, dealing a hard blow to feudal landed
property and to the workers; the expeditions of adventurers, colonisation; and above all the extension of
markets into a world market, which had now become possible and was daily becoming more and more a
fact, called forth a new phase of historical development, into which in general we cannot here enter
further. Through the colonisation of the newly discovered countries the commercial struggle of the
nations amongst one another was given new fuel and accordingly greater extension and animosity.
The expansion of trade and manufacture accelerated the accumu-lation of movable capital, while in the
guilds, which were not stimulated to extend their production, natural capital remained stationary or even
declined. Trade and manufacture created the big bourgeoisie; in the guilds was concentrated the petty
bourgeoisie, which no longer was dominant in the towns as formerly, but had to bow to the might of the
great merchants and manufacturers. Hence the decline of the guilds, as soon as they came into contact
with manufacture.
The intercourse of nations took on, in the epoch of which we have been speaking, two different forms. At
first the small quantity of gold and silver in circulation involved the ban on the export of these metals;
and industry, for the most part imported from abroad and made necessary by the need for employing the
growing urban population, could not do without those privileges which could be granted not only, of
course, against home competition, but chiefly against foreign. The local guild privilege was in these
original prohibitions extended over the whole nation. Customs duties originated from the tributes which
the feudal lords exacted as protective levies against robbery from merchants passing through their
territories, tributes later imposed likewise by the towns, and which, with the rise of the modern states,
were the Treasury's most obvious means of raising money.
The appearance of American gold and silver on the European markets, the gradual development of
industry, the rapid expansion of trade and the consequent rise of the non-guild bourgeoisie and of money,
gave these measures another significance. The State, which was daily less and less able to do without
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (5 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]
money, now retained the ban on the export of gold and silver out of fiscal considerations; the bourgeois,
for whom these masses of money which were hurled onto the market became the chief object of
speculative buying, were thoroughly content with this; privileges established earlier became a source of
income for the government and were sold for money; in the customs legislation there appeared the export
duty, which, since it only [placed] a hindrance in the way of industry, had a purely fiscal aim.
The second period began in the middle of the seventeenth century and lasted almost to the end of the
eighteenth. Commerce and navi-gation had expanded more rapidly than manufacture, which played a
secondary role; the colonies were becoming considerable consumers; and after long struggles the
separate nations shared out the opening world market among themselves. This period begins with the
Navigation Laws [2] and colonial monopolies. The competition of the nations among themselves was
excluded as far as possible by tariffs, prohibitions and treaties; and in the last resort the competitive
struggle was carried on and decided by wars (especially naval wars). The mightiest maritime nation, the
English, retained preponderance in trade and manufacture. Here, already, we find concentration in one
country.
Manufacture was all the time sheltered by protective duties in the home market, by monopolies in the
colonial market, and abroad as much as possible by differential duties. The working-up of
home-produced material was encouraged (wool and linen in England, silk in France), the export of
home-produced raw material forbidden (wool in England), and the [working-up] of imported material
neglected or suppressed (cotton in England). The nation dominant in sea trade and colonial power
naturally secured for itself also the greatest quantitative and qualitative expansion of manufacture.
Manufacture could not be carried on without protection, since, if the slightest change takes place in other
countries, it can lose its market and be ruined; under reasonably favourable conditions it may easily be
introduced into a country, but for this very reason can easily be destroyed. At the same time through the
mode in which it is carried on, particularly in the eighteenth century, in the countryside, it is to such an
extent interwoven with the vital relationships of a great mass of individuals, that no country dare
jeopardise its existence by permitting free competition. Insofar as it manages to export, it therefore
depends entirely on the extension or restriction of commerce, and exercises a relatively very small
reaction [on the latter]. Hence its secondary [importance] and the influence of [the merchants] in the
eighteenth century. It was the merchants and especially the shippers who more than anybody else pressed
for State protection and monopolies; the manufacturers also demanded and indeed received protection,
but all the time were inferior in political importance to the merchants. The commercial towns,
particularly the maritime towns, became to some extent civilised and acquired the outlook of the big
bourgeoisie, but in the factory towns an extreme petty-bourgeois outlook persisted. Cf Aikin, [3] etc. The
eighteenth century was the century of trade. Pinto says this expressly: "Le commerce fait la marotte du
si\E8cle" ; and: "Depuis quelque temps il n'est plus question que de commerce, de navgation et de marine."
[ "Commerce is the rage of the century." "For some time now people have been talking only about
commerce, navigation and the navy." -Ed.]
This period is also characterised by the cessation of the bans on the export of gold and silver and the
beginning of the trade in money; by banks, national debts, paper money; by speculation in stocks and
shares and stockjobbing in all articles; by the development of finance in general. Again capital lost a
great part of the natural character which had still clung to it.
The concentration of trade and manufacture in one country, England, developing irresistibly in the
seventeenth century, gradually created for this country a relative world market, and thus a demand for the
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (6 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]
manufactured products of this country, which could no longer be met by the industrial productive forces
hitherto existing. This demand, outgrowing the productive forces, was the motive power which, by
producing big industry -- the application of elemental forces to industrial ends, machinery and the most
complex division of labour -- called into existence the third period of private ownership since the Middle
Ages. There already existed in England the other pre-conditions of this new phase: freedom of
competition inside the nation, the development of theoretical mechanics, etc. (Indeed, the science of
mechanics perfected by Newton was altogether the most popular science in France and England in the
eighteenth century.) (Free competition inside the nation itself had everywhere to be conquered by a
revolution -- 1640 and 1688 in England, 1789 in France.) Competition soon compelled every country that
wished to retain its historical role to protect its manufactures by renewed customs regulations (the old
duties were no longer any good against big industry) and soon after to introduce big industry under
protective duties. Big industry universalised competition in spite of these protective measures (it is
practical free trade; the protective duty is only a palliative, a measure of defence within free trade),
established means of communication and the modern world market, subordinated trade to itself,
transformed all capital into industrial capital, and thus produced the rapid circulation (development of the
financial system) and the centralisation of capital. By universal competition it forced all individuals to
strain their energy to the utmost. It destroyed as far as possible ideology, religion, morality, etc. and
where it could not do this, made them into a palpable lie. It produced world history for the first time,
insofar as it made all civilised nations and every individual member of them dependent for the
satisfaction of their wants on the whole world, thus destroying the former natural exclusiveness of
separate nations. It made natural science subservient to capital and took from the division of labour the
last semblance of its natural character. It destroyed natural growth in general, as far as this is possible
while labour exists, and resolved all natural relationships into money relationships. In the place of
naturally grown towns it created the modern, large industrial cities which have sprung up overnight.
Wherever it penetrated, it destroyed the crafts and all earlier stages of industry. It completed the victory
of the commercial town over the countryside. [Its first premise] was the automatic system. [Its
development] produced a mass of productive forces, for which private [property] became just as much a
fetter as the guild had been for manufacture and the small, rural workshop for the developing craft. These
productive forces received under the system of private property a one-sided development only, and
became for the majority destructive forces; moreover, a great multitude of such forces could find no
application at all within this system. Generally speaking, big industry created everywhere the same
relations between the classes of society, and thus destroyed the peculiar individuality of the various
nationalities. And finally, while the bourgeoisie of each nation still retained separate national interests,
big industry created a class, which in all nations has the same interest and with which nationality is
already dead; a class which is really rid of all the old world and at the same time stands pitted against it.
Big industry makes for the worker not only the relation to the capitalist, but labour itself, unbearable.
It is evident that big industry does not reach the same level of development in all districts of a country.
This does not, however, retard the class movement of the proletariat, because the proletarians created by
big industry assume leadership of this movement and carry the whole mass along with them, and because
the workers excluded from big industry are placed by it in a still worse situation than the workers in big
industry itself. The countries in which big industry is developed act in a similar manner upon the more or
less non-industrial countries, insofar as the latter are swept by universal commerce into the universal
competitive struggle. [4]
These different forms are just so many forms of the organisation of labour, and hence of property. In
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (7 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]
each period a unification of the existing productive forces takes place, insofar as this has been rendered
necessary by needs.
The Relation of State and Law to Property
The first form of property, in the ancient world as in the Middle Ages, is tribal property, determined with
the Romans chiefly by war, with the Germans by the rearing of cattle. In the case of the ancient peoples,
since several tribes live together in one town, the tribal property appears as State property, and the right
of the individual to it as mere "possession which, however, like tribal property as a whole, is confined to
landed property only. Real private property began with the ancients, as with modern nations, with
movable property. -- (Slavery and community) (dominium ex jure Quiritum [5] ). In the case of the
nations which grew out of the Middle Ages, tribal property evolved through various stages -- feudal
landed property, corporative movable property, capital invested in manufacture -- to modern capital,
determined by big industry and universal competition, i.e. pure private property, which has cast off all
semblance of a communal institution and has shut out the State from any influence on the development
of property. To this modern private property corresponds the modern State, which, purchased gradually
by the owners of property by means of taxation, has fallen entirely into their hands through the national
debt, and its existence has become wholly dependent on the commercial credit which the owners of
property, the bourgeois, extend to it, as reflected in the rise and fall of State funds on the stock exchange.
By the mere fact that it is a class and no longer an estate, the bourgeoisie is forced to organise itself no
longer locally, but nationally, and to give a general form to its mean average interest. Through the
emancipation of private property from the community, the State has become a separate entity, beside and
outside civil society; but it is nothing more than the form of organisation which the bourgeois necessarily
adopt both for internal and external purposes, for the mutual guarantee of their property and interests.
The independence of the State is only found nowadays in those countries where the estates have not yet
completely developed into classes, where the estates, done away with in more advanced countries, still
have a part to play, and where there exists a mixture; countries, that is to say, in which no one section of
the population can achieve dominance over the others. This is the case particularly in Germany. The most
perfect example of the modern State is North America. The modern French, English and American
writers all express the opinion that the State exists only for the sake of private property, so that this fact
has penetrated into the consciousness of the normal man.
Since the State is the form in which the individuals of a ruling class assert their common interests, and in
which the whole civil society of an epoch is epitomised, it follows that the State mediates in the
formation of all common institutions and that the institutions receive a political form. Hence the illusion
that law is based on the will, and indeed on the will divorced from its real basis -- on free will. Similarly,
justice is in its turn reduced to the actual laws.
Civil law develops simultaneously with private property out of the disintegration of the natural
community. With the Romans the development of private property and civil law had no further industrial
and commercial consequences, because their whole mode of production did not alter. (Usury!)
With modern peoples, where the feudal community was disintegrated by industry and trade, there began
with the rise of private property and civil law a new phase, which was capable of further development.
The very first town which carried on an extensive maritime trade in the Middle Ages, Amalfi, also
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (8 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]
developed maritime law. As soon as industry and trade developed private property further, first in Italy
and later in other countries, the highly developed Roman civil law was immediately adopted again and
raised, to authority. When later the bourgeoisie had acquired so much power that the princes took up its
interests in order to overthrow the feudal nobility by means of the bourgeoisie, there began in all
countries -- in France in the sixteenth century -- the real development of law, which in all countries
except England proceeded on the basis of the Roman Codex. In England, too, Roman legal principles had
to be introduced to further the development of civil law (especially in the case of movable property). (It
must not be forgotten that law has just as little an independent history as religion.)
In civil law the existing property relationships are declared to be the result of the general will. The jus
utendi et abutendi [6] itself asserts on the one hand the fact that private property has become entirely
independent of the community, and on the other the illusion that private property itself is based solely on
the private will, the arbitrary disposal of the thing. In practice, the abuti 1 has very definite economic
limitations for the owner of private property, if he does not wish to see his property and hence his jus
abutendi pass into other hands, since actually the thing, considered merely with reference to his will, is
not a thing at all, but only becomes a thing, true property in intercourse, and independently of the law (a
relationship, which the philosophers call an idea). This juridical illusion, which reduces law to the mere
will, necessarily leads, in the further development of property relationships, to the position that a man
may have a legal title to a thing without really having the thing. If, for instance, the income from a piece
of land is lost owing to competition, then the proprietor has certainly his legal title to it along with the jus
utendi et abutendi. But he can do nothing with it: he owns nothing as a landed proprietor if in addition he
has not enough capital to cultivate his ground. This illusion of the jurists also explains the fact that for
them, as for every code, it is altogether fortuitous that individuals enter into relationships among
themselves (e.g. contracts); it explains why they consider that these relationships [can] be entered into or
not at will, and that their content rests purely on the individual [free] will of the contracting parties.
Whenever, through the development of industry and commerce, new forms of intercourse have been
evolved (e.g. assurance companies, etc.), the law has always been compelled to admit them among the
modes of acquiring property.
FOOTNOTES
[1] Four pages of the manuscript are missing here.-Ed.
[2] Navigation Laws -- a series of Acts passed in England from 1381 onwards to protect English shipping
against foreign companies. The Navigation Laws were modified in the early nineteenth century and
repealed in 1849 except for a reservation regarding coasting trade, which was revoked in 1854.
[3] The movement of capital, although considerably accelerated, still remained, however, relatively slow.
The splitting-up of the world market into separate parts, each of which was exploited by a particular
nation, the exclusion of competition among themselves on the part of the nations, the clumsiness of
production itself and the fact that finance was only evolving from its early stages, greatly impeded
circulation. The consequence of this was a haggling, mean and niggardly spirit which still clung to all
merchants and to the whole mode of carrying on trade. Compared with the manufacturers, and above all
with the craftsmen, they were certainly big bourgeois; compared with the merchants and industrialists of
the next period they remain petty bourgeois. Cf. Adam Smith.
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (9 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]
[4] Competition separates individuals from one another, not only the bourgeois but still more the
workers, in spite of the fact that it brings them together. Hence it is a long time before these individuals
can unite, apart from the fact that for the purposes of this union -- if it is not to be merely local -- the
necessary means, the great industrial cities and cheap and quick communications, have first to be
produced by big industry. Hence every organised power standing over against these isolated individuals,
who live in relationships, daily reproducing this isolation, can only be overcome after long struggles. To
demand the opposite would be tantamount to demanding that competition should not exist in this definite
epoch of history, or that the individuals should banish from their minds relationships over which in their
isolation they have no control.
[5] Ownership in accordance with the law applying to full Roman citizens.-Ed.
[6] The right of using and consuming (also: abusing), i.e. of disposing of a thing at will.-Ed.
Next Section
Table of Contents for The German Ideology
Marxist Writers Archive
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (10 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]
Karl Marx
THE GERMAN IDEOLOGY
Part I
FEUERBACH.
OPPOSTION OF THE MATERIALIST
AND IDEALIST OUTLOOK
D. PROLETARIANS AND COMMUNISM
Individuals, Class, and Community
In the Middle Ages the citizens in each town were compelled to unite against the landed nobility to save
their skins. The extension of trade, the establishment of communications, led the separate towns to get to
know other towns, which had asserted the same interests in the struggle with the same antagonist. Out of
the many local corporations of burghers there arose only gradually the burgher class. The conditions of
life of the individual burghers became, on account of their contradiction to the existing relationships and
of the mode of labour determined by these, conditions which were common to them all and independent
of each individual. The burghers had created the conditions insofar as they had torn themselves free from
feudal ties, and were created by them insofar as they were determined by their antagonism to the feudal
system which they found in existence. When the individual towns began to enter into associations, these
common conditions developed into class conditions. The same conditions, the same contradiction, the
same interests necessarily called forth on the whole similar customs everywhere. The bourgeoisie itself
with its conditions, develops only gradually, splits according to the division of labour into various
fractions and finally absorbs all propertied classes it finds in existence [1] (while it develops the majority
of the earlier propertyless and a part of the hitherto propertied classes into a new class, the proletariat) in
the measure to which all property found in existence is transformed into industrial or commercial capital.
The separate individuals form a class only insofar as they have to carry on a common battle against
another class; otherwise they are on hostile terms with each other as competitors. On the other hand, the
class in its turn achieves an independent existence over against the individuals, so that the latter find their
conditions of existence predestined, and hence have their position in life and their personal development
assigned to them by their class, become subsumed under it. This is the same phenomenon as the
subjection of the separate individuals to the division of labour and can only be removed by the abolition
of private property and of labour itself We have already indicated several times how this subsuming of
individuals under the class brings with it their subjection to all kinds of ideas, etc.
If from a philosophical point of view one considers this evolution of individuals in the common
conditions of existence of estates and classes, which followed on one another, and in the accompanying
general conceptions forced upon them, it is certainly very easy to imagine that in these individuals the
species, or "Man", has evolved, or that they evolved "Man" -- and in this way one can give history some
hard clouts on the ear. [2] One can conceive these various estates and classes to be specific terms of the
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (1 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]
general expression, subordinate varieties of the species, or evolutionary phases of "Man".
This subsuming of individuals under definite classes cannot be abolished until a class has taken shape,
which has no longer any particular class interest to assert against the ruling class.
The transformation, through the division of labour, of personal powers (relationships) into material
powers, cannot be dispelled by dismissing the general idea of it from one's mind, but can only be
abolished by the individuals again subjecting these material powers to themselves and abolishing the
division of labour. This is not possible without the community. Only in community [with others has
each] individual the means of cultivating his gifts in all directions; only in the community, therefore, is
personal freedom possible. In the previous substitutes for the community, in the State, etc. personal
freedom has existed only for the individuals who developed within the relationships of the ruling class,
and only insofar as they were individuals of this class. The illusory community, in which individuals
have up till now combined, always took on an independent existence in relation to them, and was at the
same time, since it was the combination of one class over against another, not only a completely illusory
community, but a new fetter as well. In a real community the individuals obtain their freedom in and
through their association.
Individuals have always built on themselves, but naturally on themselves within their given historical
conditions and relationships, not on the "pure" individual in the sense of the ideologists. But in the course
of historical evolution, and precisely through the inevitable fact that within the division of labour social
relationships take on an independent existence, there appears a division within the life of each individual,
insofar as it is personal and insofar as it is determined by some branch of labour and the conditions
pertaining to it. (We do not mean it to be understood from this that, for example, the rentier, the
capitalist, etc. cease to be persons; but their personality is conditioned and determined by quite definite
class relationships, and the division appears only in their opposition to another class and, for themselves,
only when they go bankrupt.) In the estate (and even more in the tribe) this is as yet concealed: for
instance, a nobleman always remains a nobleman, a commoner always a commoner, apart from his other
relationships, a quality inseparable from his individuality. The division between the personal and the
class individual, the accidental nature of the conditions of life for the individual, appears only with the
emergence of the class, which is itself a product of the bourgeoisie. This accidental character is only
engendered and developed by competition and the struggle of individuals among themselves. Thus, in
imagination, individuals seem freer under the dominance of the bourgeoisie than before, because their
conditions of life seem accidental; in reality, of course, they are less free, because they are more
subjected to the violence of things. The difference from the estate comes out particularly in the
antagonism between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. When the estate of the urban burghers, the
corporations, etc. emerged in opposition to the landed nobility, their condition of existence -- movable
property and craft labour, which had already existed latently before their separation from the feudal ties
-- appeared as something positive, which was asserted against feudal landed property, and, therefore, in
its own way at first took on a feudal form. Certainly the refugee serfs treated their previous servitude as
something accidental to their personality. But here they only were doing what every class that is freeing
itself from a fetter does; and they did not free themselves as a class but separately. Moreover, they did
not rise above the system of estates, but only formed a new estate, retaining their previous mode of
labour even in their new situation, and developing it further by freeing it from its earlier fetters, which no
longer corresponded to the development already attained. [3]
For the proletarians, on the other hand, the condition of their existence, labour, and with it all the
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (2 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]
conditions of existence governing modern society, have become something accidental, something over
which they, as separate individuals, have no control, and over which no social organisation can give them
control. The contradiction between the individuality of each separate proletarian and labour, the
condition of life forced upon him, becomes evident to him himself, for he is sacrificed from youth
upwards and, within his own class, has no chance of arriving at the conditions which would place him in
the other class.
Thus, while the refugee serfs only wished to be free to develop and assert those conditions of existence
which were already there, and hence, in the end, only arrived at free labour, the proletarians, if they are to
assert themselves as individuals, will have to abolish the very condition of their existence hitherto (which
has, moreover, been that of all society up to the present), namely, labour. Thus they find themselves
directly opposed to the form in which, hitherto, the individuals, of which society consists, have given
themselves collective expression, that is, the State. In order, therefore, to assert themselves as
individuals, they must overthrow the State.
It follows from all we have been saying up till now that the communal relationship into which the
individuals of a class entered, and which was determined by their common interests over against a third
party, was always a community to which these individuals belonged only as average individuals, only
insofar as they lived within the conditions of existence of their class -- a relationship in which they
participated not as individuals but as members of a class. With the community of revolutionary
proletarians, on the other hand, who take their conditions of existence and those of all members of
society under their control, it is just the reverse; it is as individuals that the individuals participate in it. It
is just this combination of individuals (assuming the advanced stage of modern productive forces, of
course) which puts the conditions of the free development and movement of individuals under their
control -- conditions which were previously abandoned to chance and had won an independent existence
over against the separate individuals just because of their separation as individuals, and because of the
necessity of their combination which had been determined by the division of labour, and through their
separation had become a bond alien to them. Combination up till now (by no means an arbitrary one,
such as is expounded for example in the Contrat social, but a necessary one) was an agreement upon
these conditions, within which the individuals were free to enjoy the freaks of fortune (compare, e.g., the
formation of the North American State and the South American republics). This right to the undisturbed
enjoyment, within certain conditions, of fortuity and chance has up till now been called personal
freedom. These conditions of existence are, of course, only the productive forces and forms of
intercourse at any particular time.
Forms of Intercourse
Communism differs from all previous movements in that it overturns the basis of all earlier relations of
production and intercourse, and for the first time consciously treats all natural premises as the creatures
of hitherto existing men, strips them of their natural character and subjugates them to the power of the
united individuals. Its organisation is, therefore, essentially economic, the material production of the
conditions of this unity; it turns existing conditions into conditions of unity. The reality, which
communism is creating, is precisely the true basis for rendering it impossible that anything should exist
independently of individuals, insofar as reality is only a product of the preceding intercourse of
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (3 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]
individuals themselves. Thus the communists in practice treat the conditions created up to now by
production and intercourse as inorganic conditions, without, however, imagining that it was the plan or
the destiny of previous generations to give them material, and without believing that these conditions
were inorganic for the individuals creating them. The difference between the individual as a person and
what is accidental to him, is not a conceptual difference but an historical fact. This distinction has a
different significance at different times -- e.g. the estate as something accidental to the individual in the
eighteenth century, the family more or less too. It is not a distinction that we have to make for each age,
but one which each age makes itself from among the different elements which it finds in existence, and
indeed not according to any theory, but compelled by material collisions in life. What appears accidental
to the later age as opposed to the earlier -- and this applies also to the elements handed down by an
earlier age -- is a form of intercourse which corresponded to a definite stage of development of the
productive forces. The relation of the productive forces to the form of intercourse is the relation of the
form of intercourse to the occupation or activity of the individuals. (The fundamental form of this
activity is, of course, material, on which depend all other forms-mental, political, religious, etc. The
various shaping of material life is, of course, in every case dependent on the needs which are already
developed, and the production, as well as the satisfaction, of these needs is an historical process, which is
not found in the case of a sheep or a dog (Stirner's refractory principal argument adversus hominem),
although sheep and dogs in their present form certainly, but malgr\E9 eux, are products of an historical
process.) The conditions under which individuals have intercourse with each other, so long as the
above-mentioned contradiction is absent, are conditions appertaining to their individuality, in no way
external to them; conditions under which these definite individuals, living under definite relationships,
can alone produce their material life and what is connected with it, are thus the conditions of their
self-activity and are produced by this self-activity. The definite condition under which they produce, thus
corresponds, as long as the contradiction has not yet appeared, to the reality of their conditioned nature,
their one-sided existence, the one-sidedness of which only becomes evident when the contradiction
enters on the scene and thus exists for the later individuals. Then this condition appears as an accidental
fetter, and the consciousness that it is a fetter is imputed to the earlier age as well.
These various conditions, which appear first as conditions of self-activity, later as fetters upon it, form in
the whole evolution of history a coherent series of forms of intercourse, the coherence of which consists
in this: in the place of an earlier form of intercourse, which has become a fetter, a new one is put,
corresponding to the more developed productive forces and, hence, to the advanced mode of the
self-activity of individuals-a form which in its turn becomes a fetter and is then replaced by another.
Since these conditions correspond at every stage to the simultaneous development of the productive
forces, their history is at the same time the history of the evolving productive forces taken over by each
new generation, and is, therefore, the history of the development of the forces of the individuals
themselves.
Since this evolution takes place naturally, i.e. is not subordinated to a general plan of freely combined
individuals, it proceeds from various localities, tribes, nations, branches of labour, etc. each of which to
start with develops independently of the others and only gradually enters into relation with the others.
Furthermore, it takes place only very slowly; the various stages and interests are never completely
overcome, but only subordinated to the prevailing interest and trail along beside the latter for centuries
afterwards. It follows from this that within a nation itself the individuals, even apart from their pecuniary
circumstances, have quite different developments, and that an earlier interest, the peculiar form of
intercourse of which has already been ousted by that belonging to a later interest, remains for a long time
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (4 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]
afterwards in possession of a traditional power in the illusory community (State, law), which has won an
existence independent of the individuals; a power which in the last resort can only be broken by a
revolution. This explains why, with reference to individual points which allow of a more general
summing-up, consciousness can sometimes appear further advanced than the contemporary empirical
relationships, so that in the struggles of a later epoch one can refer to earlier theoreticians as authorities.
On the other hand, in countries which, like North America, begin in an already advanced historical
epoch, the development proceeds very rapidly. Such countries have no other natural premises than the
individuals, who settled there and were led to do so because the forms of intercourse of the old countries
did not correspond to their wants. Thus they begin with the most advanced individuals of the old
countries, and, therefore, with the correspondingly most advanced form of intercourse, before this form
of intercourse has been able to establish itself in the old countries. This is the case with all colonies,
insofar as they are not mere military or trading stations. Carthage, the Greek colonies, and Iceland in the
eleventh and twelfth centuries, provide examples of this. A similar relationship issues from conquest,
when a form of intercourse which has evolved on another soil is brought over complete to the conquered
country: whereas in its home it was still encumbered with interests and relationships left over from
earlier periods, here it can and must be established completely and without hindrance, if only to assure
the conquerors' lasting power. (England and Naples after the Norman conquest. when they received the
most perfect form of feudal organisation.)
This contradiction between the productive forces and the form of intercourse, which, as we saw, has
occurred several times in past history, without, however, endangering the basis, necessarily on each
occasion burst out in a revolution, taking on at the same time various subsidiary forms, such as
all-embracing collisions, collisions of various classes, contradiction of consciousness, battle of ideas,
etc., political conflict, etc. From a narrow point of view one may isolate one of these subsidiary forms
and consider it as the basis of these revolutions; and this is all the more easy as the individuals who
started the revolutions had illusions about their own activity according to their degree of culture and the
stage of historical development.
Thus all collisions in history have their origin, according to our view, in the contradiction between the
productive forces and the form of intercourse. Incidentally, to lead to collisions in a country, this
contradiction need not necessarily have reached its extreme limit in this particular country. The
competition with industrially more advanced countries, brought about by the expansion of international
intercourse, is sufficient to produce a similar contradiction in countries with a backward industry (e.g. the
latent proletariat in Germany brought into view by view by the competition of English industry).
Conquest
This whole interpretation of history appears to be contradicted by the fact of conquest. Up till now
violence, war, pillage, murder and robbery, etc. have been accepted as the driving force of history. Here
we must limit ourselves to the chief points and take, therefore, only the most striking example -- the
destruction of an old civilisation by a barbarous people and the resulting formation of an entirely new
organisation of society. (Rome and the barbarians; feudalism and Gaul; the Byzantine Empire and the
Turks.)
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (5 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]
With the conquering barbarian people war itself is still, as indicated above, a regular form of intercourse,
which is the more eagerly exploited as the increase in population together with the traditional and, for it,
the only possible, crude mode of production gives rise to the need for new means of production. In Italy,
on the other hand, the concentration of landed property (caused not only by buying-up and indebtedness
but also by inheritance, since loose living being rife and marriage rare, the old families gradually died out
and their possessions fell into the hands of a few) and its conversion into grazing land (caused not only
by the usual economic forces still operative today but by the importation of plundered and tribute-corn
and the resultant lack of demand for Italian corn) brought about the almost total disappearance of the free
population. The very slaves died out again and again, and had constantly to be replaced by new ones.
Slavery remained the basis of the whole productive system. The plebeians, midway between freemen and
slaves, never succeeded in becoming more than a proletarian rabble. Rome indeed never became more
than a city; its connection with the provinces was almost exclusively political and could, therefore, easily
be broken again by political events.
Nothing is more common than the notion that in history up till now it has only been a question of taking.
The barbarians take the Roman Empire, and this fact of taking is made to explain the transition from the
old world to the feudal system. In this taking by barbarians, however, the question is, whether the nation
which is conquered has evolved industrial productive forces, as is the case with modern peoples, or
whether their productive forces are based for the most part merely on their association and on the
community. Taking is further determined by the object taken. A banker's fortune, consisting of paper,
cannot be taken at all, without the taker's submitting to the conditions of production and intercourse of
the country taken. Similarly the total industrial capital of a modern industrial country. And finally,
everywhere there is very soon an end to taking, and when there is nothing more to take, you have to set
about producing. From this necessity of producing, which very soon asserts itself, it follows that the form
of community adopted by the settling conquerors must correspond to the stage of development of the
productive forces they find in existence; or, if this is not the case from the start, it must change according
to the productive forces. By this, too, is explained the fact, which people profess to have noticed
everywhere in the period following the migration of the peoples, namely, that the servant was master,
and that the conquerors very soon took over language, culture and manners from the conquered. The
feudal system was by no means brought complete from Germany, but had its origin, as far as the
conquerors were concerned, in the martial organisation of the army during the actual conquest, and this
only evolved after the conquest into the feudal system proper through the action of the productive forces
found in the conquered countries. To what an extent this form was determined by the productive forces is
shown by the abortive attempts to realise other forms derived from reminiscences of ancient Rome
(Charlemagne, etc.).
Contradictions of Big Industry: Revolution
Our investigation hitherto started from the instruments of production, and it has already shown that
private property was a necessity for certain industrial stages. In industrie extractive private property still
coincides with labour; in small industry and all agriculture up till now property is the necessary
consequence of the existing instruments of production; in big industry the contradiction between the
instrument of production and private property appears from the first time and is the product of big
industry; moreover, big industry must be highly developed to produce this contradiction. And thus only
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (6 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]
with big industry does the abolition of private property become possible.
In big industry and competition the whole mass of conditions of existence, limitations, biases of
individuals, are fused together into the two simplest forms: private property and labour. With money
every form of intercourse, and intercourse itself, is considered fortuitous for the individuals. Thus money
implies that all previous intercourse was only intercourse of individuals under particular conditions, not
of individuals as individuals. These conditions are reduced to two: accumulated labour or private
property, and actual labour. If both or one of these ceases, then intercourse comes to a standstill. The
modern economists themselves, e.g. Sismondi, Cherbuliez, etc., oppose "association of individuals" to
"association of capital". On the other hand, the individuals themselves are entirely subordinated to the
division of labour and hence are brought into the most complete dependence on one another. Private
property, insofar as within labour itself it is opposed to labour, evolves out of the necessity of
accumulation, and has still, to begin with, rather the form of the communality; but in its further
development it approaches more and more the modern form of private property. The division of labour
implies from the outset the division of the conditions of labour, of tools and materials, and thus the
splitting-up of accumulated capital among different owners, and thus, also, the division between capital
and labour, and the different forms of property itself. The more the division of labour develops and
accumulation grows, the sharper are the forms that this process of differentiation assumes. Labour itself
can only exist on the premise of this fragmentation.
Thus two facts are here revealed. First the productive forces appear as a world for themselves, quite
independent of and divorced from the individuals, alongside the individuals: the reason for this is that the
individuals, whose forces they are, exist split up and in opposition to one another, whilst, on the other
hand, these forces are only real forces in the intercourse and association of these individuals. Thus, on the
one hand, we have a totality of productive forces, which have, as it were, taken on a material form and
are for the individuals no longer the forces of the individuals but of private property, and hence of the
individuals only insofar as they are owners of private property themselves. Never, in any earlier period,
have the productive forces taken on a form so indifferent to the intercourse of individuals as individuals,
because their intercourse itself was formerly a restricted one. On the other hand, standing over against
these productive forces, we have the majority of the individuals from whom these forces have been
wrested away, and who, robbed thus of all real life-content, have become abstract individuals, but who
are, however, only by this fact put into a position to enter into relation with one another as individuals.
The only connection which still links them with the productive forces and with their own existence --
labour -- has lost all semblance of self-activity and only sustains their life by stunting it. While in the
earlier periods self-activity and the production of material life were separated, in that they devolved on
different persons, and while, on account of the narrowness of the individuals themselves, the production
of material life was considered as a subordinate mode of self-activity, they now diverge to such an extent
that altogether material life appears as the end, and what produces this material life, labour (which is now
the only possible but, as we see, negative form of self-activity), as the means.
Thus things have now come to such a pass that the individuals must appropriate the existing totality of
productive forces, not only to achieve self-activity, but, also, merely to safeguard their very existence.
This appropriation is first determined by the object to be appropriated, the productive forces, which have
been developed to a totality and which only exist within a universal intercourse. From this aspect alone,
therefore, this appropriation must have a universal character corresponding to the productive forces and
the intercourse.
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (7 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]
The appropriation of these forces is itself nothing more than the development of the individual capacities
corresponding to the material instruments of production. The appropriation of a totality of instruments of
production is, for this very reason, the development of a totality of capacities in the individuals
themselves.
This appropriation is further determined by the persons appropriating. Only the proletarians of the
present day, who are completely shut off from all self-activity, are in a position to achieve a complete
and no longer restricted self-activity, which consists in the appropriation of a totality of productive forces
and in the thus postulated development of a totality of capacities. All earlier revolutionary appropriations
were restricted; individuals, whose self-activity was restricted by a crude instrument of production and a
limited intercourse, appropriated this crude instrument of production, and hence merely achieved a new
state of limitation. Their instrument of production became their property, but they themselves remained
subordinate to the division of labour and their own instrument of production. In all expropriations up to
now, a mass of individuals remained subservient to a single instrument of production; in the
appropriation by the proletarians, a mass of instruments of production must be made subject to each
individual, and property to all. Modern universal intercourse can be controlled by individuals, therefore,
only when controlled by all.
This appropriation is further determined by the manner in which it must be effected. It can only be
effected through a union, which by the character of the proletariat itself can again only be a universal
one, and through a revolution, in which, on the one hand, the power of the earlier mode of production
and intercourse and social organisation is overthrown, and, on the other hand, there develops the
universal character and the energy of the proletariat, without which the revolution cannot be
accomplished; and in which, further, the proletariat rids itself of everything that still clings to it from its
previous position in society.
Only at this stage does self-activity coincide with material life, which corresponds to the development of
individuals into complete individuals and the casting-off of all natural limitations. The transformation of
labour into self-activity corresponds to the transformation of the earlier limited intercourse into the
intercourse of individuals as such. With the appropriation of the total productive forces through united
individuals, private property comes to an end. Whilst previously in history a particular condition always
appeared as accidental, now the isolation of individuals and the particular private gain of each man have
themselves become accidental.
The individuals, who are no longer subject to the division of labour, have been conceived by the
philosophers as an ideal, under the name "Man". They have conceived the whole process which we have
outlined as the evolutionary process of "Man", so that at every historical stage "Man" was substituted for
the individuals and shown as the motive force of history. The whole process was thus conceived as a
process of the self-estrangement of "Man", and this was essentially due to the fact that the average
individual of the later stage was always foisted on to the earlier stage, and the consciousness of a later
age on to the individuals of an earlier. Through this inversion, which from the first is an abstract image of
the actual conditions, it was possible to transform the whole of history into an evolutionary process of
consciousness.
Finally, from the conception of history we have sketched we obtain these further conclusions: (1) In the
development of productive forces there comes a stage when productive forces and means of intercourse
are brought into being, which, under the existing relationships, only cause mischief, and are no longer
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (8 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]
productive but destructive forces (machinery and money); and connected with this a class is called forth,
which has to bear all the burdens of society without enjoying its advantages, which, ousted from society,
is forced into the most decided antagonism to all other classes; a class which forms the majority of all
members of society, and from which emanates the consciousness of the necessity of a fundamental
revolution, the communist consciousness, which may, of course, arise among the other classes too
through the contemplation of the situation of this class. (2) The conditions under which definite
productive forces can be applied are the conditions of the rule of a definite class of society, whose social
power, deriving from its property, has its practical-idealistic expression in each case in the form of the
State; and, therefore, every revolutionary struggle is directed against a class, which till then has been in
power.[4] (3) In all revolutions up till now the mode of activity always remained unscathed and it was
only a question of a different distribution of this activity, a new distribution of labour to other persons,
whilst the communist revolution is directed against the preceding mode of activity, does away with
labour, and abolishes the rule of all classes with the classes themselves, because it is carried through by
the class which no longer counts as a class in society, is not recognised as a class, and is in itself the
expression of the dissolution of all classes, nationalities, etc. within present society; and (4) Both for the
production on a mass scale of this communist consciousness, and for the success of the cause itself, the
alteration of men on a mass scale is, necessary, an alteration which can only take place in a practical
movement, a revolution; this revolution is necessary, therefore, not only because the ruling class cannot
be overthrown in any other way, but also because the class overthrowing it can only in a revolution
succeed in ridding itself of all the muck of ages and become fitted to found society anew.
FOOTNOTES
[1] [Marginal note by Marx:] To begin with it absorbs the branches of labour directly belonging to the
State and then all \B1[more or less] ideological estates.
[2] The Statement which frequently occurs with Saint Max that each is all that he is through the State is
fundamentally the same as the statement that bourgeois is only a specimen of the bourgeois species; a
statement which presupposes that the class of bourgeois existed before the individuals constituting it.
[Marginal note by Marx to this sentence:] With the philosophers pre-existence of the class.
[3] N.B. -- It must not he forgotten that the serf's very need of existing and the im-possibility of a
large-scale economy, which involved the distribution of the allotments among the serfs, very soon
reduced the services of the serfs to their lord to an average of payments in kind and statute-labour. This
made it possible for the serf to accumulate movable property and hence facilitated his escape out of the
possession of his lord and gave him the prospect of making his way as an urban citizen; it also created
gradations among the serfs, so that the runaway serfs were already half burghers. It is likewise obvious
that the serfs who were masters of a craft had the best chance of acquiring movable property.
[4] [Marginal note by Marx:] The people are interested in maintaining the present state of production.
Table of Contents for The German Ideology
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (9 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]
Marxist Writers Archive
The German Ideology
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (10 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]
Karl Marx and Fredrick Engels
A Critique of the German Ideology
Abstract of Chapter 3
[Idealist mistakes & Materialist corrections]
Idealist misconceptions
On Hierachy
On Religion
Consciousness throughout history
An idealist conception of Humans
On Language & Idealism
Individuality according to Materialism
Individualism created
Individualism in a class perspective
The relation of individual interests to class interests
The role of will in the desires of an individual
Individuality in thought and desire
Needs being the vocation of all human beings
The role of individual will in the foundation of the
state
Individuals and their relationships
Miscellaneous
The Family
Consciousness changing with the development of
society
Freeing labor
Communists on Selfishness and Selflessnes
Alienation due to private property
The relation of the bourgeois to the capitalist state
On Competition
Personal Competition
The monetary crisis
The German ideology was never published in
Marx or Engels lifetime. When the manuscript
was discovered, tattered and worn down, the full
book was published by the Institute of Marxism in
the USSR. Since its publication, the first chapter,
as printed in this publication in whole, received
enormous popularity as an excellent overview of
the materialist conception of history. At the same
time however, the second and third chapter
received unanimous notoriety for being without
value, critiquing ideas long since forgotten,
neglected even by Marx and Engels who never
even finished this, their first joint book.
While the main body of the book is not valuable,
there are portions of material, where Marx and
Engels were explaining their theory instead of
critiquing those long forgotten, that contain clear
and valuable information. The only criteria used
for selecting material for this collection was
simply that information where Marx and Engels
explained their own theories.
If you would like to read their critique of Saint
Max and Saint Bruno then read the book; about a
quarter of Chapters 2 & 3 are dedicated solely to a
critique. Nearly the entire remainder of the book is
a repetition of Saint Max and Saint Bruno's
writers, very meticulously and thoroughly
reproduced in this text. While a critique of Saint
Max and Saint Bruno would be useful to read if
the ideas they expressed were of any relevance or
importance, this is not the case. The ideas they
supported are long since forgotten.
Paragraphs have been introduced to the selected
passages for easier reading, and section headers
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (1 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
have been inserted.
Idealism
" Hierarchy is the domination of thought , the domination of the spirit.... Hierarchy is the supreme
domination of spirit ."
In the foregoing presentation Jacques le bonhomme conceives history merely as the product of abstract
thoughts \97 or, rather, of his notions of abstract thoughts \97 as governed by these notions, which, in the
final analysis, are all resolved into the "holy". This domination of the "holy", of thought, of the Hegelian
absolute idea over the incurable world he further betrays as a historical relation existing at the present
time, as the domination of the holy ones, the ideologies, over the vulgar world \97 as a hierarchy. In this
hierarchy, what previously appeared consecutively exists side-by-side, so that one of the two co-existing
forms of development rules over the other...
The outcome, of course, is bound to be that the domination which the "world of thoughts" exercises from
the outset in history is at the end of the latter also presented as the real, actually existing domination of
the thinkers \97 and, as we shall see, in the final analysis, as the domination of the speculative
philosophers \97 over the world of things, so that Saint Max has only to fight against thoughts and ideas
of the ideologies and to overcome them, in order to make himself "possessor of the world of things in the
world of thoughts".
p. 186
As for the actual hierarchy of the Middle Ages, we shall merely note here that it did not exist for the
people, for the great mass of human beings. For the great mass only feudalism existed, and hierarchy
only existed insofar as it was itself either feudal or anti-feudal (within the framework of feudalism).
Feudalism itself had entirely empirical relations as its basis. Hierarchy and struggle against feudalism
(the struggle of the ideologies of a class against the class itself) are only the ideological expression of
feudalism and of the struggles developing within feudalism itself \97 which include also the struggles of
the feudally organized nations among themselves. Hierarchy is the ideal form of feudalism; feudalism is
a political form of the medieval relations of production and intercourse. Consequently, the struggle of
feudalism against hierarchy can only be explained by elucidating these practical material relations. This
elucidation of itself puts an end to the previous conception of history which took the illusions of the
Middle Ages on trust, in particular those illusions which the Emperor and the Pope brought to bear in
their struggle against each other.
p. 190
We now come to present-day hierarchy, to the domination of the idea in ordinary life.... Since the middle
class demand love for their kingdom, their regime, they want, according to Jacques le bonhomme, to
"establish the kingdom of love on earth". (p. 98) Since they demand respect for their domination and for
the conditions in which it is exercised, and therefore want to usurp domination over respect, they
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (2 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
demand, according to this worthy man [Jacques le bonhomme], the domination of respect as such, their
attitude towards respect is the same as towards the holy spirit dwelling within them. (p. 95) Jacques le
bonhomme, with his faith that can move mountains, takes as the actual, earthly basis of the bourgeois
world the distorted form in which the sanctimonious and hypocritical ideology of the bourgeoisie voices
their particular interests as universal interests. Why this ideological delusion assumes precisely this form
for our Saint, we shall see in connection with "political liberalism".
p. 193-4
On Religion
In religion people make their empirical world into an entity that is only conceived, imagined, that
confronts them as something foreign. This again is by no means to be explained from other concepts,
from "self-consciousness" and similar nonsense, but from the entire hitherto existing mode of production
and intercourse, which is just as independent of the pure concept as the invention of the self-acting mule
and the use of railways are independent of Hegelian philosophy. If he wants to speak of an "essence" of
religion, i.e., of a material basis of this inessentiality, then he should look for it neither in the "essence of
man", nor in the predicate of God, but in the material world which each stage of religious development
finds in existence.
p. 172
The only reason why Christianity wanted to free us from the domination of the flesh and "desires as a
driving force" was because it regarded our flesh, our desires as something foreign to us; it wanted to free
us from determination by nature only because it regarded our own nature as not belonging to us.
For if I myself am not nature, if my natural desires, my whole natural character, do not belong to myself
\97 and this is the doctrine of Christianity \97 then all determination by nature \97 whether due to my own
natural character or to what is known as external nature \97 seems to me a determination by something
foreign, a fetter, compulsion used against me, heteronomy as opposed to autonomy of the spirit .
Incidentally, Christianity has indeed never succeeded in freeing us from the domination of desires.
p. 272
Consciousness throughout history
[In ancient times] the ideas and thoughts of people were, of course, ideas and thoughts about themselves
and their relationships, their consciousness of themselves and of people in general \97 for it was the
consciousness not merely of a single individual but of the individual in his interconnection with the
whole of society and about the whole of the society in which they live.
The conditions, independent of them, in which they produce their life, the necessary forms of intercourse
connected herewith, and the personal and social relations thereby given, had to take the form \97 insofar
as they were expressed in thoughts \97 of ideal conditions and necessary relations, i.e., they had to be
expressed in consciousness as determinations arising from the concept of man as such , from human
essence, from the nature of man, from man as such . What people were, what their relations were,
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (3 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
appeared in consciousness as ideas of man as such , of his modes of existence or of his immediate
conceptual determinations.
So, after the ideologists had assumed that ideas and thoughts had dominated history up to now, that the
history of these ideas and thoughts constitutes all history up to now, after they had imagined that real
conditions had conformed to man as such and his ideal conditions, i.e., to conceptual determinations,
after they had made the history of people's consciousness of themselves the basis of their actual history,
after all this, nothing was easier than to call the history of consciousness, of ideas, of the holy, of
established concepts \97 the history of "man" and to put it in the place of real history.
p. 198
An idealist conception of Humans
Sancho raises the important question:
"But how to curb the inhuman being who dwells in each individual? How can one manage not to set free
the inhuman being along with the human being?.... At the side of the human being there's always the
inhuman being, that egoist, the individual. State, society, mankind cannot master this devil."
In the form in which Sancho understands it, the question again becomes sheer nonsense. He imagines
that people up to now have always formed a concept of man, and then won freedom for themselves to the
extent that was necessary to realize this concept; that the measure of freedom that they achieved was
determined each time by their idea of the ideal of man at the time; it was thus unavoidable that in each
individual there remained a residue which did not correspond to this ideal and, hence, since it was
"inhuman", was either not set free or only freed malgre eux .
In reality, of course, what happened was that people won freedom for themselves each time to the extent
that was dictated and permitted not by their ideal of man, but by the existing productive forces. All
emancipation carried through hitherto has been based, however, on unrestricted productive forces. The
production which these productive forces could provide was insufficient for the whole of society and
made development possible only if some persons satisfied their needs at the expense of others, and
therefore some \97 the minority \97 obtained the monopoly of development, while others \97 the majority
\97 owing to the constant struggle to satisfy their most essential needs, were for the time being (i.e., until
the creation of new revolutionary productive forces) excluded from any development.
Thus, society has hitherto always developed within the framework of a contradiction \97 in antiquity the
contradiction between freemen and slaves, in the Middle Ages that between nobility and serfs, in modern
times that between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. This explains, on the one hand, the abnormal,
"inhuman" way in which the oppressed class satisfies its needs, and, on the other hand, the narrow limits
within which intercourse, and with it the whole ruling class, develops. And this restricted character of
development consists not only in the exclusion of one class from development, but also in the
narrowmindedness of the excluding class, and the "inhuman" is to be found also within the ruling class.
This so-called "inhuman" is just as much a product of present-day relations as the "human" is; it is their
native aspect, the rebellion \97 which is not based on any new revolutionary productive force \97 against
the prevailing relations brought about by the existing productive forces, and against the way of satisfying
needs that correspond to these relations. The positive expression "human" corresponds to the definite
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (4 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
relations predominate at a certain stage of production in the way of satisfying needs determined by them,
just as the negative expression "inhuman" corresponds to the attempt to negate these predominate
relations in the way of satisfying needs prevailing under them without changing the existing mode of
production, an attempt that this stage of production daily engenders afresh.
p. 457
On Language & Idealism
One of the most difficult tasks confronting philosophers is to descend from the world of thought to the
actual world. Language is the immediate actuality of thought. Just as philosophers have given thought an
independent existence, so they were bound to make language into an independent realm. This is a secret
of philosophical language, in which thoughts in the form of words have their own content. The problem
of descending from the world of thoughts to the actual world is turned into the problem of descending
from language to life.
We have shown [in Chapter 1] that thoughts and ideas acquire an independent existence in consequence
of the personal circumstances and relations of individuals acquiring independent existence. We have
shown that exclusive, systematic occupation with these thoughts on the part of ideologists and
philosophers, and hence the systemization of these thoughts, is a consequence of division of labour, and
that, in particular, German philosophy is a consequence of German petty-bourgeois conditions. The
philosophers have only to dissolve their language into the ordinary language, from which it is abstracted,
in order to recognize it as the distorted language of the actual world and to realize that neither thoughts
nor language in themselves form a realm of their own, that they are only manifestations of actual life.
p. 472-3
We have seen that the whole problem of the transition from thought to reality, hence from language to
life, exists only in philosophical illusion, i.e., it is justified only for philosophical consciousness, which
cannot possibly be clear about the nature and origin of its apparent separation from life. This great
problem, insofar as it at all entered the minds of our ideologists, was bound, of course, to result of finely
in one of these knights-errant setting out in search of a word which, as a word , formed the transition in
question, which, as a word, ceases to be simply a word, and which, as a word, in a mysterious super
linguistic manner, points from within the language to the actual object it denotes; which, in short, plays
among words the same role as the Redeeming God-Man plays among people in Christian fantasy. The
emptiest, shallowest brain among the philosophers had to "end" philosophy by proclaiming his lack of
thought to be the end of philosophy and thus the triumphant entry into "corporal" life. His philosophizing
mental vacuity was already in itself the end of philosophy just as his unspeakable language was the end
of all language.
p. 475
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (5 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
Individuality
Critique: "humans create themselves out of nothing"
Far from it being true that "out of nothing" I make myself, for example, a "[public] speaker", the nothing
which forms the basis here is a very manifold something, the real individual, his speech organs, a definite
stage of physical development, an existing language and dialects, ears capable of hearing and a human
environment from which it is possible to hear something, etc., etc. therefore, in the development of a
property something is created by something out of something, and by no means comes, as in Hegel's
Logic , from nothing, through nothing to nothing. [Th. I. Abt. 2 of Hegel]
p. 162
Individualism in a class perspective
When the narrowminded bourgeois says to the Communists: by abolishing property, i.e., my existence as
a capitalist, as a landed proprietor, as a factory owner, and your existence as workers, you abolished my
individuality and your own; by making it impossible for me to exploit you, the workers, to rake in my
profit, interest or rent, you make it impossible for me to exist as an individual.
When, therefore, the bourgeois tells the Communists: by abolishing my existence as the bourgeois , you
abolish my existence as an individual ; when thus he identifies himself as a bourgeois with himself as an
individual, one must, at least, recognize his frankness and shamelessness. For the bourgeois it is actually
the case, he believes himself to be an individual only in so far as he is a bourgeois.
But when the theoreticians of the bourgeoisie come forward and give a general expression to this
assertion, when they equate the bourgeois's property with individuality in theory as well and want to give
a logical justification for this equation, then this nonsense begins to become solemn and holy.
p. 246
The relation of individual interests to class interests
[Sancho asks:] How is it that personal interests always develop, against the will of individuals, into class
interests, into common interests which acquire independent existence in relation to the individual
persons, and in their independence assume the form of general interests? How is it that as such they
come into contradiction with the actual individuals and in this contradiction, by which they are defined as
general interests, they can be conceived by consciousness as ideal and even as religious, holy interests?
How is it that in this process of private interests acquiring independent existence as class interests the
personal behavior of the individual is bound to be objectified [sich versachlichen], estranged [sich
entfremden], and at the same time exists as a power independent of him and without him, created by
intercourse, and is transformed into social relations, into a series of powers which determined and
subordinate the individual, in which, therefore, appear in the imagination as "holy" powers?
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (6 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
Had Sancho understood the fact that within the framework of definite modes of production , which, of
course, are not dependent on the will, alien practical forces, which are independent not only of isolated
individuals but even of all of them together, always come to stand above people \97 then he could be
fairly indifferent as to whether this fact is preserved in the religious form or distorted in the fancy of the
egoist, above whom everything is placed in imagination, in such a way that he places nothing above
himself. Sancho would then have descended from the realm of speculation into the realm of reality, from
what people fancy to what they actually are, from what they imagine to how they act and are bound to act
in definite circumstances. What seems to him a product of thought , he would have understood to be a
product of life . He would not then have arrived at the absurdity worthy of him \97 of explaining the
division between personal and general interests by saying that people imagine this division also in a
religious way and seem to themselves to be such and such, which is, however, only another word for
"imagining".
Incidentally, even in the banal, petty-bourgeois German form in which Sancho perceives contradiction of
personal and general interests, he should realize that individuals have always started out from
themselves, and could not do otherwise, and that therefore the two aspects he noted are aspects of the
personal development of individuals; both are equally engendered by the empirical conditions under
which the individuals live, both are only expressions of one and the same personal development of
people and are therefore only in seeming contradiction to each other.
p. 262-3
The role of will in the desires of an individual
Whether a desire becomes fixed or not, i.e., whether it obtains exclusive [power over us] \97 which,
however, does [not] exclude [further progress] \97 depends on whether material circumstances, "bad"
mundane conditions permit the normal satisfaction of this desire and, on the other hand, the development
of a totality of desires. This latter depends, in turn, on whether we live in circumstances that allow
all-round activity and thereby the full development of all our potentialities. On the actual conditions, and
the possibility of development they give each individual, depends also whether thoughts become fixed or
not \97 just as, for example, the fixed ideas of the German philosophers, these "victims of society", qui
nous font pitie [for whom we feel pity], are inseparable from the German conditions.
An avaricious person is not an owner, but a servant, and he can do nothing for his own sake without at
the same time doing it for the sake of his master."
No one can do anything without at the same time doing it for the sake of one or other of his needs and for
the sake of the organ of this need \97 for Stirner this means that this need and its organ are made into a
master over him, just as earlier he made the means for satisfying a need into a master over him. Stirner
cannot eat without at the same time eating for the sake of his stomach. If the worldly conditions prevent
him from satisfying his stomach, then his stomach becomes a master over him, the desire to eat becomes
a fixed desire, and the thought of eating becomes a fixed idea \97 which at the same time gives him an
example of the influence of world conditions and fixing his desires and ideas. Sancho's "revolt" against
the fixation of desires and thoughts is thus reduced to an impotent moral injunction about self-control and
provides new evidence that he merely gives an ideologically high sounding expression to the most trivial
sentiments of the petty-bourgeois.
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (7 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
[The following two paragraphs are crossed out in the manuscript, likely because the authors did not feel
they fit into context and not because of their content (brackets are used for words that were illegible)]:
Since they attack the material basis on which the hitherto inevitable fixedness of desires and ideas
depended, the Communists are the only people through whose historical activity the liquefaction of the
fixed desires and ideas is in fact brought about and ceases to be an impotent moral injunction, as it was
up to now with all moralists "down to" Stirner. Communist organization has a twofold effect on the
desires produced in the individual by present-day relations; some of these desires \97 namely desires
which exist under all relations, and only change their form and direction under different social relations
\97 are merely altered by the Communist social system, for they are given the opportunity to develop
normally; but others \97 namely those originating solely in a particular society, under particular
conditions of [production] and intercourse \97 are totally deprived of their conditions of existence. Which
[of the desires] will be merely changed and [which eliminated] in a Communist [society] can [only occur
in a practical] way, by [changing the real], actual [conditions of production and intercourse.]
A desire is already by its mere existence something "fixed", and it can occur only to St. Max and his like
not to allow his sex instinct, for instance, to become "fixed"; it is that already and will cease to be fixed
only as a result of castration or impotence. Each need, which forms the basis of a "desire", is likewise
something "fixed", and try as he may St. Max cannot abolish this "fixedness" and for example contrive to
free himself from the necessity of eating within "fixed" periods of time. The Communists have no
intention of abolishing the fixedness of their desires and needs, an intention which Stirner, immersed in
his world of fancy, ascribes to them and all other men; they only strive to achieve an organization of
production and intercourse which will make possible the normal satisfaction of all needs, i.e., a
satisfaction which is limited only by the needs themselves.
p. 272-3
Individuality in thought and desire
It depends not on consciousness , but on being ; not on thought, but on life; it depends on the individual's
empirical development and manifestation of life, which in turn depends on the conditions existing in the
world.
If the circumstances in which the individual lives allow him only the [one]-sided development of one
quality at the expense of all the rest, [if] they give him the material and time to develop only that one
quality, then this individual achieves only a one-sided, crippled development. No moral preaching avails
here. And the manner in which this one, preeminently favored quality develops depends again, on the
one hand, on the material available for its development and, on the other hand, on the degree and manner
in which the other qualities are suppressed.
Precisely because thought, for example, is the thought of a particular, definite individual, it remains his
definite thought, determined by his individuality in the conditions in which he lives. The thinking
individual therefore has no need to resort to prolonged reflection about thought as such in order to
declare that his thought is his own thought, his property; from the outset it is his own, peculiarly
determined thought and it was precisely his peculiarity which [in the case of St.] Sancho [was found to
be] the "opposite" of this, the peculiarity which is peculiar " as such ".
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (8 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
In the case of an individual, for example, whose life embraces a wide circle of varied activities and
practical relations to the world, and who, therefore, lives a many-sided life, thought has the same
character of universality as every other manifestation of his life. Consequently, it neither becomes fixed
in the form of abstract thought nor does it need complicated tricks of reflection when the individual
passes from thought to some other manifestation of life. From the outset it is always a factor in the total
life of the individual, one which disappears and is reproduced as required .
In the case of a parochial Berlin schoolmaster or author, however, whose activity is restricted to arduous
work on the one hand and the pleasure of thought on the other, whose world extends from [the small
confines of their city], whose relations to this world are reduced to a minimum by his pitiful position in
life, when such an individual experiences the need to think, it is indeed inevitable that his thought
becomes just as abstract as he himself and his life, and that thought confronts him, who is quite incapable
of resistance, in the form of a fixed power, whose activity offers the individual the possibility of a
momentary escape from his "bad world", of a momentary pleasure.
In the case of such an individual the few remaining desires, which arise not so much from intercourse
with a world as from the constitution of the human body, expressed themselves only through
repercussion , i.e., they assume their narrow development the same one-sided and crude character as
does his thought, they appear only along intervals, stimulated by the excessive development of the
predominant desire (fortified by immediate physical causes, e.g., [stomach] spasm) and are manifested
turbulently and forcibly, with the most brutal suppression of the ordinary, [natural] desire [\97 this leads
to further] domination over [thought.] As a matter of course, the schoolmaster's [thinking reflects on and
speculates about] is empirical [fact in a school] masterly fashion.
p. 280-1
Needs being the vocation of all human beings
For St. Sancho vocation has a double form; firstly as a vocation which others choose for me \97 examples
of which we have already had above in the case of newspapers that are full of politics and the prisons that
our Saint mistook for houses of moral correction. Afterward vocation appears also as a vocation in which
the individual himself believes.
If the ego is divorced from all its empirical conditions of life, it's activity, the conditions of its existence,
if it is separated from the world that forms its basis and from its own body, then, of course, it has no
other vocation and no other designation than that of representing the human being of the logical
proposition and to assist St. Sancho in arriving at the equations given above.
In the real world, on the other hand, where individuals have needs, they thereby already have a vocation
and task ; and at the outset it is still immaterial whether they make this their vocation in their imagination
as well. It is clear, however, that because the individuals possess consciousness they form an idea of this
vocation which their empirical existence has given them and, thus, furnish St. Sancho with the
opportunity of seizing on the word vocation, that is, on the mental expression of their actual conditions of
life, and of leading out of account these conditions of life themselves.
The proletarian, for example, who like every human being has the vocation of satisfying his needs and
who is not in a position to satisfy even the needs that he has in common with all human beings, the
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (9 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
proletarian whom the necessity to work a 14 hour day debases to the level of the beast of burden, whom
competition degrades to a mere thing, an article of trade, who from his position as a mere productive
force, the sole position left to him, is squeezed out by other, more powerful productive forces \97 this
proletarian is, if only for these reasons, confronted with the real task of revolutionizing his conditions. He
can, of course, imagine this to be his "vocation", he can also, if he likes to engage in propaganda, express
his "vocation" by saying that to do this or that is the human vocation of the proletarian, the more so since
his position does not even allow him to satisfy the needs arising directly from his human nature. St.
Sancho does not concern himself with the reality underlining this idea, with the practical name of this
proletarian \97 he clings to the word "vocation" and declares it to be the holy, and the proletarian to be a
servant of the holy \97 the easiest way of considering himself superior and "proceeding further".
Particularly in the relations that have existed hitherto, when one class always ruled, when the conditions
of life of an individual always coincided with the conditions of life of a class, when, therefore, the
practical task of each newly emerging class was bound to appear to each of its members as a universal
task, and when each class could actually overthrow its predecessor only by liberating the individuals of
all classes from certain chains which had hitherto fettered them \97 under these circumstances it was
essential that the task of the individual members of a class striving for domination should be described as
a universal human task.
Incidentally, when for example the bourgeois tells the proletarian that his, the proletarian's, human task is
to work 14 hours a day, the proletarian is quite justified in replying in the same language that, on the
contrary, his task is to overthrow the entire bourgeois system.
p. 305-7
"Vocation, designation, task, ideal" are either:
1. The idea of the revolutionary tasks laid down for an oppressed class by the material conditions; or
2. Mere idealistic paraphrases, or also the conscious expression of the individuals' modes of activity
which owing to the division of labour have assumed independent existence as various professions; or
3. The conscious expression of the necessity which at every moment confronts individuals, classes and
nations to assert their position through some quite definite activity; or
4. The conditions of existence of the ruling class (as determined by the preceding development of
production), ideally expressed in law, morality, etc., to which [conditions] the ideologists of that class
more or less consciously gave a sort of theoretical independence; they can be conceived by separate
individuals of that class as vocation, etc., and are held up as a standard of life to the individuals of the
oppressed class, partly as an intelligent or recognition of domination, partly as the moral means for this
domination. It is to be noted here, as in general with ideologists, that they inevitably put a thing
upside-down and regard their ideology both as the creative force and as the aim of all social relations,
whereas it is only an expression and symptom of these relations.
p. 444
The role of individual will in the foundation of the state
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (10 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
In actual history, those theoreticians who regarded might as the basis of right were in direct contradiction
to those who looked on will as the basis of right... If power is taken as the basis of right, as Hobbes, etc.,
do, then right, law, etc., are merely the symptom, the expression of other relations upon which state
power rests.
The material life of individuals, which by no means depends merely on their "will", their mode of
production and form of intercourse, which mutually determined each other \97 this is the real basis of the
state and remained so at all the stages at which division of labor and private property are still necessary,
quite independently of the will of individuals. These actual relations are in no way created by the state
power; on the contrary they are the power creating it.
The individuals who rule in these conditions \97 leaving aside the fact that their power must assume the
form of the state \97 have to give their will, which is determined by these definite conditions, a universal
expression as the will of the state, as law, an expression whose content is always determined by the
relations of this class, as the civil and criminal law demonstrates in the clearest possible way. Just as the
weight of their bodies does not depend on there idealistic will or on their arbitrary decision, so also the
fact that they enforce their own will in the form of law, and at the same time to make it independent of
the personal arbitrariness of each individual among them, does not depend on there idealistic will.
Their personal rule must at the same time assume the form of average rule. Their personal power is based
on conditions of life which as they develop are common to many individuals, and the continuance of
which they, as ruling individuals, have to maintain against others and, at the same time, to maintain that
they are holding good for everybody. The expression of this will, which is determined by their common
interests, is the law.
It is precisely because individuals who are independent of one another assert themselves and their own
will, and because on this basis their attitude to one another is bound to be egoistical, that self-denial is
made necessary in law and right, self-denial in the exceptional case, in self-assertion of their interests in
the average case (which, therefore, not they , but only the "egoist in agreement with himself" regards as
self-denial). The same applies to the classes which are ruled, whose will plays just as small a part in
determining the existence of law and the state.
For example, so long as the productive forces are still insufficiently developed to make competition
superfluous, and therefore would give rise to competition over and over again, for so long the classes
which are ruled would be wanting to be impossible if they had the "will" to abolish competition and with
it the state and the law. Incidentally, too, it is only in the imagination of the ideologists that this "will"
arises before relations have developed far enough to make the emergence of such a will possible. After
relations have developed sufficiently to produce it, the ideologist is able to imagine this will as being
purely arbitrary and therefore as conceivable at all times and under all circumstances.
Like right, so crime, i.e., the struggle of the isolated individual against the predominant relations, is not
the result of pure arbitrariness. On the contrary, it depends on the same conditions as that domination.
The same visionaries who see in right and law the domination of some independently existing general
will see in crime the mere violation of right and along. Hence the state does not exist owing to the
dominant will, but the state, which arises from the material mode of life of individuals, has also the form
of a dominant will. If the latter loses its domination, it means that not only the will has changed but also
the material existence and life of individuals, and only for that reason has their will changed. It is
possible for rights and laws to be "inherited", but in that case they are no longer dominant, but nominal,
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (11 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
of which striking examples are furnished by the history of ancient Roman law and English law.
We saw earlier how a theory and history of pure thought could arise among philosophers owning to the
separation of ideas from the individuals and empirical relations which serve as the basis of these ideas. In
the same way, here too one can separate right from its real basis, whereby one obtains a "dominant will"
which in different eras undergoes various modifications and has its own, independent history in its
creations, the laws. On this account, political and civil history becomes ideologically merged in a history
of the domination of successive laws.... The most superficial examination of legislation, e.g., for laws
and all countries, shows how far the rulers got when they imagined that they could achieve something by
means of their "dominant will" alone, i.e., simply by exercising their will.
p. 348-50
Individuals and their relationships
Even that which constitutes the advantage of an individual as such over other individuals, is in our day at
the same time a product of society and in its realization is bound to assert itself as privilege, as we have
already shown Sancho in connection with competition. Further, the individual as such, regarded by
himself, is subordinated to division of labour, which makes him one-sided, cripples and determines him.
Individuals have always and in all circumstances "proceeded from themselves ", but since they were not
unique in the sense of not needing any connections with one another, and since their needs , consequently
their nature, and the method of satisfying their needs, connected them with one another (relations
between the sexes, exchange, division of labour), they had to enter into relations with one another.
Moreover, since they entered into intercourse with one another not as pure egos, but as individuals at a
definite stage of development of their productive forces and requirements, and since this intercourse, in
its turn, determined production and needs, it was, therefore, precisely the personal, individual behavior of
individuals, their behavior to one another as individuals, that created the existing relations and daily
reproduces them anew. They entered into intercourse with one another as what they were, they proceeded
"from themselves", as they were, irrespective of their "outlook onlife".
This "outlook on life" \97 even the warped one of the [idealist] philosophers \97 could, of course, only be
determined by their actual life. Hence it certainly follows that the development of an individual is
determined by the development of all the others with whom he is directly or indirectly associative, and
that the different generations of individuals entering into relations with one another are connected with
one another, that the physical existence of the latter generations is determined by that of their
predecessors, and that these later generations inherit the productive forces and forms of intercourse
accumulated by their predecessors, their own mutual relations being determined thereby. In short, it is
clear that development takes place and that the history of the single individual cannot possibly be
separated from the history of preceding or contemporary individuals, but is determined by this history.
The transformation of the individual relationship into its opposite, a purely material relationship, the
distinction of individuality and fortuity by the individuals themselves is a historical process, as we have
already shown ( Chapter 1, Part IV, \A7 6 ), and at different stages of development it assumes different,
ever sharper and more universal forms.
In the present epoch, the domination of material relations over individuals, and the suppression of
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (12 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
individuality by fortuitous circumstances, has assumed its sharpest and most universal form, thereby
setting existing individuals a very definite task. It has set them the task of replacing the domination of
circumstances and a chance over individuals by the domination of individuals over chance and
circumstances. It has not, as Sancho imagines, put forward the demand that "I should develop myself",
which up to now every individual has done without Sancho's good advice; it has on the contrary called
for liberation from a quite definite mode of development. This task, dictated by present-day relations,
coincides with the task of organizing society in the Communist way.
We have already shown above that the abolition of a state of affairs in which relations become
independent of individuals, in which individuality is subservient to chance and the personal relations of
individuals are subordinated to general class relations, etc. \97 that the abolition of this state of affairs is
determined in the final analysis by the abolition of division of labour. We also shown that the abolition of
division of labour is determined by the development of intercourse and productive forces to such a
degree of universality that private property and division of labour becomes fetters on them. We have
further shown that private property can be abolished only on condition of an all-around development of
individuals, precisely because the existing form of intercourse and the existing productive forces are all
embracing and only individuals that are developing in an all-around fashion can appropriate them, i.e.,
can turn them into free manifestations of their lives. We have shown that at the present time individuals
must abolish private property, because the productive forces and forms of intercourse have developed so
far that, under the domination of private property, they have become destructive forces, and because the
contradiction between the classes has reached its extreme limit. Finally, we have shown that the abolition
of private property in the division of labour is itself the association of individuals on the basis created by
modern productive forces and world's intercourse. [See Chapter One]
Within Communist society, the only society in which the genuine and free development of individuals
ceases to be a mere phrase, this development is determined precisely by the connection of individuals, a
connection which consists partly in the economic prerequisites and partly in the necessary solidarity of
the free development of all, and finally, in the universal character of the activity of individuals on the
basis of the existing productive forces. We are, therefore, here concerned with individuals at a definite
historical stage of development and by no means merely with individuals chosen at random, even
disregarding the indispensable Communist revolution, which itself is a general condition for their free
development. The individuals' consciousness of their mutual relations will, of course, likewise be
completely changed, and, therefore, will no more be the "principal of love" or devoument than it will be
egoism.
p. 463-5
Miscellaneous
The Family
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (13 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
[In the family] entirely empirical relations dominate. The attitude of the bourgeois to the institutions of
his regime is like that of the Jew to the law; he evades them whenever it is possible to do so in each
individual case, but he wants everyone else to observe them. If the entire bourgeoisie, in a mass and at
one time, were to evade bourgeois institutions, it would cease to be bourgeois \97 a conduct which, of
course, never occurs to the bourgeois and by no means depends on their willing or running [i.e., it is
dictated by historical conditions]. The dissolute bourgeois evades marriage and secretly commits
adultery; the merchant evades the institution of property by depriving others of property by speculation,
bankruptcy, etc.; the young bourgeois makes himself independent of his family, if he can by in fact
abolishing the family as far as he is concerned.
But marriage, property, the family remain untouched in theory, because they are the practical basis on
which the bourgeoisie has directed its domination, and because in their bourgeois form they are the
conditions which make the bourgeois a bourgeois, just as the constantly evaded law makes the religious
Jew a religious Jew. This attitude of the bourgeois to the conditions of his existence acquires one of its
universal forms in bourgeois mentality. One cannot speak at all of the family " as such ". Historically the
bourgeois gives the family the character of the bourgeois family, in which boredom and money are the
binding link, in which also includes the bourgeois dissolution of the family, which does not prevent the
family itself from always continuing to exist. It's dirty existence as its counterpart in the holy concept of
it in official phraseology and universal hypocrisy.
Where the family is actually abolished, as with the proletariat, just the opposite of what "Stirner" thinks
takes place. Then the concept of the family does not exist at all, but here and there family affection based
on extremely real relations is certainly to be found.
In the 18th-century the concept of the [feudal] family was abolished by the philosophers, because the
actual family was already in the process of dissolution at the highest pinnacles of civilization. The
internal family bond, the separate components constituting the concept of the family were dissolved, for
example, obedience, piety, fidelity in marriage, etc.; but the real body the family, the property relation,
the exclusive attitude in relation to their families, forced cohabitation \97 relations determined by the
existence of children, the structure of modern towns, the formation of capital, etc. \97 all these were
preserved, along with numerous violations, because the existence of the family is made necessary by its
connection with the mode of production, which exists independently of the will of bourgeois society.
That it was impossible to do without it was demonstrated in the most striking way during the French
Revolution, when for a moment the family was as good as legally abolished. The family continues to
exist even in the 19th-century, only the process of its dissolution has become more general, not on
account of the concept, but because of the higher development of industry and competition; the family
still exists although its dissolution was long ago proclaimed by French and English Socialists and this has
at last penetrated also to the German church fathers, by way of French novels.[A]
p. 194-5
[A] The sarcasm of Marx and Engels may not be retained in this shortened form; this statement is
saracastic. Marx and Engels are explaining that ideas and novels alone cannot change the fact; only real
changes in the relations of production, i.e. only through the establishment of communism, will the family
actually be abolished.
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (14 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
Consciousness changing with the development of society
The more the normal form of intercourse of society, and with it the conditions of the ruling class, develop
their contradiction to the advanced productive forces, and the greater the consequent discord within the
ruling class itself as well as between it and the class ruled by it, the more fictitious, of course, becomes
the consciousness which originally corresponded to this form of intercourse (i.e., it ceases to be the
consciousness corresponding to this form of intercourse), and the more do the old traditional ideas of
these relations of intercourse, in which actual private interests, etc., etc., are expressed as universal
interests, descend to the level of mere idealizing phrases, conscious illusion, deliberate hypocrisy. But the
more their falsity is exposed by life, and the less meaning they have to consciousness itself, the more
resolutely are they asserted, the more hypocritical, moral and holy becomes the language of this normal
society.
p. 310
Freeing labor
The modern state, the rule of the bourgeoisie, is based on freedom of labour .... Freedom of Labour is
free competition of the workers among themselves.... Labor is free in all civilized countries; it is not a
matter of freeing labor but of abolishing it.
p. 220-221
Free activity for the Communists is the creative manifestation of life arising from the free development
of all abilities of the whole person.
p. 242
Communists on selfishness and selflessnes
Communists do not oppose egoism to selflessness or selflessness to egoism, nor do they express this
contradiction theoretically either in its sentimental or in its highflown ideological form; they rather
demonstrate its material source, with which it disappears of itself. The Communists do not preach
morality at all.
They do not put to people the moral demand: love one another, do not be egoists, etc.; on the contrary,
they are very well aware that egoism, just as much selflessness, is in definite circumstances a necessary
form of the self-assertion of individuals. Hence, the Communists by no means want to do away with the
"private individual" for the sake of the "general", selfless man. That is a statement of the imagination.
Communist theoreticians, the only Communists who have time to devote to the study of history, are
distinguished precisely by the fact that they alone have discovered that throughout history the "general
interest" is created by individuals who are defined as "private persons". They know that this contradiction
is only a seeming one because one side of it, what is called the "general interest", is constantly being
produced by the other side, private interest, and in relation to the latter is by no means an independent
force with an independent history \97 so that this contradiction is in practice constantly destroyed and
reproduced. Hence it is not a question of the Hegelian "negative unity" of two sides of the contradiction,
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (15 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
but of the materially determined destruction of the preceding materially determined mode of life of
individuals, with the disappearance of which this contradiction together with its unity also disappears.
p. 264-5
Alienation due to private property
Private property alienates the individuality not only of people but also of things. Land has nothing to do
with rent of land, the machine has nothing to do with profit. For the landed proprietor, land has the
significance only of rent of land; he leases his plots of land and receives rent; this is a feature which land
can lose without losing a single one of its inherent features, without, for example, losing any part of its
fertility; it is a feature the extent and even the existence of which depends on social relations which are
created and destroyed without the assistance of individual landed proprietors. It is the same with
machines. How little connection there is between money, the most general form of property, and personal
peculiarity, how much they are directly opposed to each other was already known to Shakespeare better
than to our theorizing petty-bourgeois:
Thus much of this will make black, white; foul, fair;
Wrong, right; base, noble; old, young; coward, valiant.
This yellow slave...
Will make the hoar leprosy adored...
This it is
That makes the wappened widow wed again;
She, whom the spittle-house and ulcerous sores
Would cast the gorge at, this embalms and spices
To th' April day again...
Thou visible god,
That solder'st close impossibilities,
And makest them kiss!
[William Shakespeare, Timon of Athens , Act IV, Scene III.]
In a word, rent of land, profit, etc., these forms of existence of private property, are social relations
corresponding to a definite stage of production, and they are "individual" only so long as they have not
become fetters on the existing productive forces.
p. 247-8
The relation of the bourgeois to the capitalist state
With the development and accumulation of bourgeois property, i.e., with the development of commerce
and industry, individuals grew richer and richer while the state fell ever more deeply into debt.
It is therefore obvious that as soon as the bourgeoisie has accumulated money, the state has to beg from
the bourgeoisie and in the end it is actually bought up by the latter. This takes place in the period in
which the bourgeoisie is still confronted by another class, and consequently the state can retain some
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (16 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
appearance of independence in relation to both of them. Even after the state has been bought up [by
special trusts, interest groups, lobbying, bribes, etc.], it still needs money and, therefore, continues to be
dependent on the bourgeoisie; nevertheless, when the interests of the bourgeoisie demanded, the state can
have had its disposal more funds then states which are less developed and, therefore, less burdened with
debts.
p. 382
On Competition
Those relations brought about by competition: the abolition of local narrowness, the establishment of
means of communication, highly developed division of Labour, world intercourse, the proletariat,
machinery, the relation between supply and demand, etc. *
As for the proletarians, they \97 at any rate in the modern form \97 first arose out of competition; they
have already repeatedly set up collected enterprises which, however, always perish because they were
unable to compete with the "contending" private bankers, butchers, etc., and because for proletarians \97
owing to the frequent opposition of interests among them arising out of the division of labour \97 no other
"agreement" is possible than a political one directed against the whole present system. Where the
development of competition enables the proletarians to "come to an understanding", they reach an
understanding not about public bakeries but about quite different matters [,i.e. the overthrow of the
bourgeois system for a proletarian one.].
p. 392-3
* A minor grammatical alteration of the text
Personal Competition
Incidentally, competition certainly began as a "competition of persons" possessing "personal means".
The liberation of the feudal serfs, the first condition of competition, and the first accumulation of
"things" were purely "personal" acts.
If one person, thanks to good food, careful education and physical exercise, has acquired well-developed
bodily powers and skill, while another, owing to inadequate and unhealthy food and consequent poor
digestion, and as the result of neglect in childhood and overexertion, has never been able to acquire the
"things" necessary for developing his muscles \97 not to mention acquiring mastery over them \97 within
the "personal power" of the first in relation to the second is a purely material one. It was not "through
personal power" that he gained the "means that were lacking"; on the contrary, he owes his "personal
power" to the material means already existing.
Incidentally, the transformation of personal means into material means and of material means into
personal means is only an aspect of competition and quite inseparable from it. The demand that
competition should be conducted not with material means but with personal means amounts to the moral
postulate that competition and the relations on which it depends should have consequences other than
those inevitably arising from them.
p. 397-8
The German Ideology \97 Ch 3
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (17 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]
The monetary crisis
The power of money, the fact that the universal means of exchange becomes independent in relation both
to society and to individuals, reveals most clearly that the relations of production and intercourse as a
whole assume an independent existence....
The material power of money, which is strikingly revealed in monetary crisis and which, in the form of a
prominent scarcity of money, oppresses the petty-bourgeois who is "inclined to make purchases", is
likewise a highly unpleasant fact for that egoist [a reference to Sancho] in agreement with himself. He
gets rid of the difficulty by reversing the ordinary idea of the petty-bourgeois, thus making it appear that
the attitude of individuals to the power of money is something that depends solely on their personal
willing or running. This fortunate turn of thought then gives him the chance of reading a moral lecture,
buttressed by synonymy, etymology and vowel mutation, to the astounded petty-bourgeois already
disheartening by lack of money, and thus debarring in advance all inconvenient questions about the
causes of the pecuniary embarrassment.
The monetary crisis consist primarily in the fact that all "wealth" [vermogen] suddenly becomes
depreciated in relation to the means of exchange and loses its "power" [vermogen] over money. A crisis
is in existence precisely when one can no longer pay with one's "wealth"[vermogen], but must pay with
money. And this again does not happen because of a shortage of money, as is imagined by the
petty-bourgeois who judges the crisis by his personal difficulties, but because the specific difference
becomes fixed between money and as the universal commodity, the "marketable property and property in
circulation", and all the other, particular commodities, which suddenly ceased to be marketable property.
